CHAPTER 1
THE UNSTRAIGHTFORWARD PATH

Midway upon the journey of our life
I found myself within a forest dark,
For the straightforward pathway had been lost.
—DANTE, THE DIVINE COMEDY: INFERNO, CANTO I

IN EVERY CULTURE WE KNOW OF, WHETHER IT BE SECULAR or religious, ethnically
diverse or not, the question of how to live is central. How should we handle
life’s challenges and vicissitudes? How should we conduct ourselves in the
world and treat others? And the ultimate question: how do we best prepare for
the final test of our character, the moment when we die?
The numerous religions and philosophies that have been devised over human
history to address these issues offer answers ranging from the mystical to the
hyper-rational. Recently, even science has gotten into the business, with an
onslaught of technical papers and popular books on happiness and how to
achieve it, accompanied by the obligatory brain scans displaying “your brain
on…” whatever it is that may increase or decrease your satisfaction with life.
Correspondingly, the tools to seek answers to existential questions vary as much
as the approaches that have been used—from sacred texts to deep meditation,
from philosophical arguments to scientific experiments.
The resulting panorama is truly astounding and reflects both the creativity of
the human spirit and the urgency that we obviously attach to inquiries into
meaning and purpose. You can embrace any of a large variety of options within
the Judeo-Christian-Islamic religions, for instance; or choose one of a panoply of
schools of Buddhism; or opt instead for Taoism, or Confucianism, among many
others. If philosophy, rather than religion, is your cup of tea, then you can turn to
existentialism, secular humanism, secular Buddhism, ethical culture, and so
forth. Or you can arrive instead at the conclusion that there is no meaning—

indeed, the very search for it is meaningless—and embrace a “happy” sort of
nihilism (yes, there is such a thing).
For my part, I’ve become a Stoic. I do not mean that I have started keeping a
stiff upper lip and suppressing my emotions. As much as I love the character of
Mr. Spock (which Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry purportedly modeled
after his—naïve, as it turns out—understanding of Stoicism), these traits
represent two of the most common misconceptions about what it means to be a
Stoic. In reality, Stoicism is not about suppressing or hiding emotion—rather, it
is about acknowledging our emotions, reflecting on what causes them, and
redirecting them for our own good. It is also about keeping in mind what is and
what is not under our control, focusing our efforts on the former and not wasting
them on the latter. It is about practicing virtue and excellence and navigating the
world to the best of our abilities, while being mindful of the moral dimension of
all our actions. As I explain in this book, in practice Stoicism involves a dynamic
combination of reflecting on theoretical precepts, reading inspirational texts, and
engaging in meditation, mindfulness, and other spiritual exercises.
One of the key tenets of Stoicism is that we ought to recognize, and take
seriously, the difference between what we can and cannot master. This
distinction—also made by some Buddhist doctrines—is often taken to indicate a
tendency of Stoics to withdraw from social engagement and public life, but a
closer look at both Stoic writings and, more importantly, the lives of famous
Stoics will dispel this impression: Stoicism was very much a philosophy of
social engagement and encouraged love for all humankind and Nature as well. It
is this apparently contradictory tension between the advice to focus on one’s
thoughts and the social dimension of Stoicism that drew me to it as a practice.
I arrived at Stoicism, not on my way to Damascus, but through a combination
of cultural happenstance, life’s vicissitudes, and deliberate philosophical choice.
In retrospect, it seems inevitable that my path would eventually lead me to the
Stoics. Raised in Rome, I have considered Stoicism part of my cultural heritage
ever since I studied ancient Greek and Roman history and philosophy in high
school, although it wasn’t until recently that I sought to make its principles part
of my everyday life.
I am by profession a scientist and philosopher, and I have therefore always
been inclined to seek more coherent ways to understand the world (through
science) and better choices for living my life (through philosophy). A few years
ago, I wrote a book, Answers for Aristotle: How Science and Philosophy Can
Lead Us to a More Meaningful Life, in which I explored such a framework,

which I called sciphi. The basic approach was to combine the ancient idea of
virtue ethics, which focuses on character development and the pursuit of
personal excellence as the pillars providing meaning to our lives, with the latest
that the natural and social sciences tell us about human nature and how we work,
fail, and learn. As it happened, this was only the beginning of my journey toward
philosophical self-awareness.
Something else was going on at the time that made me pause and reflect. I
have not been a religious person since my teenage years (I was prompted to
leave Catholicism, in part, by reading Bertrand Russell’s famous Why I Am Not a
Christian in high school), and as such I have been on my own in dealing with
questions of where my morals and the meaning in my life come from. I take it
that an increasing number of people in the United States and across the world
find themselves facing a similar conundrum. While sympathetic to the idea that
lack of religious affiliation should be just as acceptable a choice in life as any
religious one, and strongly supportive of the constitutional separation of church
and state in the United States and elsewhere, I have also grown increasingly
dissatisfied with (make that downright irritated by) the intolerant anger of the socalled New Atheists, represented by Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris, among
others. Although public criticism of religion (or of any idea) is the staple of a
healthy democratic society, people don’t respond very well to being belittled and
insulted. On this point the Stoic philosopher Epictetus clearly agrees with me, all
the while displaying his characteristic sense of humor: “At this point you run the
risk of him saying, ‘What business is that of yours, sir? What are you to me?’
Pester him further, and he is liable to punch you in the nose. I myself was once
keen for this sort of discourse, until I met with just such a reception.”
There are, of course, alternatives to the New Atheism if you want to pursue a
nonreligious approach to life, including secular Buddhism and secular
humanism. Yet these two paths—the two major ones on offer for those seeking a
meaningful secular existence—are somehow unsatisfactory to me, though for
opposite reasons. I find Buddhism’s currently dominant modes a bit too
mystical, and its texts opaque and hard to interpret, especially in light of what we
know about the world and the human condition from modern science (and
despite a number of neurobiological studies that persuasively show the mental
benefits of meditation). Secular humanism, which I have embraced for years,
suffers from the opposite problem: it is too dependent on science and a modern
conception of rationality, with the result that—despite the best efforts of its
supporters—it comes across as cold and not the sort of thing you want to bring

your kids to on a Sunday morning. Hence, I think, the spectacular lack of
success (numerically speaking) of secular humanist organizations.
By contrast, in Stoicism I have found a rational, science-friendly philosophy
that includes a metaphysics with a spiritual dimension, is explicitly open to
revision, and, most importantly, is eminently practical. The Stoics accepted the
scientific principle of universal causality: everything has a cause, and everything
in the universe unfolds according to natural processes. There is no room for
spooky transcendental stuff. But they also believed that the universe is structured
according to what they called the Logos, which can be interpreted as either God
or simply what is sometimes termed “Einstein’s god”: the simple, indubitable
fact that Nature is understandable by reason.
Although other components of the Stoic system are important, by far the
distinguishing feature of Stoicism is its practicality: it began in the guise of, and
has always been understood as, a quest for a happy and meaningful life. Not
surprisingly, then, its fundamental texts—pretty much all of them coming to us
from the late Roman Stoa (as the Stoic school was called), since most of the
early writings have been lost—are paragons of clarity. Epictetus, Seneca,
Musonius Rufus, and Marcus Aurelius speak to us in plain language, far
removed from the often cryptic Buddhist texts or even the flowery allegories of
early Christianity. One of my favorite quotations, again from Epictetus,
exemplifies this down-to-earth practicality: “Death is necessary and cannot be
avoided. I mean, where am I going to go to get away from it?”
The final reason I turned to Stoicism is that this philosophy speaks most
directly and convincingly to the inevitability of death and how to prepare for it. I
recently passed the half-century mark, a seemingly arbitrary point in life that
nonetheless prompted me to engage in broader reflections: who am I, and what
am I doing? As a nonreligious person, I was also looking for some sort of
playbook on how to prepare for the eventual end of my life. Beyond my own
preoccupations, we live in a society where life keeps being extended by modern
science and more and more of us will consequently find ourselves needing to
decide what to do with our existence for decades after retiring. Moreover,
whatever we decide about the meaning of our extended lives, we also need to
find ways of preparing ourselves and our loved ones to face the permanent
demise of our own consciousness, of our unique presence in this world. And we
need to know how to die in a dignified way that allows us to achieve tranquillity
of mind and is of comfort to those who survive us.
Famously, the original Stoics devoted a great deal of effort and many writings

to what Seneca referred to as the ultimate test of character and principle. “We die
every day,” he wrote to his friend Gaius Lucillius. Seneca connected this test to
the rest of our existence on earth: “A man cannot live well if he knows not how
to die well.” Life, for the Stoics, is an ongoing project, and death, its logical,
natural end point, is nothing special in and of itself and nothing that we should
particularly fear. This view resonated with me, striking a balance as it did
between opposite attitudes to which I had been exposed and which I found
unpalatable: no fantasizing about an immortality of which there is neither
evidence nor reason to believe in, but also no secular dismissal—or worse,
avoidance—of the issue of death and personal extinction.
For these and other reasons, I’m not alone in my quest to revive this ancient
practical philosophy and adapt it to twenty-first-century life. Every fall
thousands of people participate in Stoic Week, a worldwide philosophy event–
cum–social science experiment organized by a team at the University of Exeter
in England, with the collaboration of academic philosophers, cognitive
therapists, and everyday practitioners from all over the world. The goal of Stoic
Week is twofold: on the one hand, to get people to learn about Stoicism and its
relevance to their lives, and on the other hand, to collect systematic data to see
whether practicing Stoicism actually makes a difference. The preliminary results
from the Exeter initiative are tentative (in future Stoic Weeks, more sophisticated
experimental protocols will be used and larger sample sizes collected), but they
are promising. Participants in the third international Stoic Week, for instance,
reported a 9 percent increase in positive emotions, an 11 percent decrease in
negative emotions, and a 14 percent improvement in life satisfaction after one
week of practice. (The previous year the team conducted longer-term follow-ups,
and they confirmed the initial results for people who kept practicing.)
Participants also seem to think that Stoicism makes them more virtuous: 56
percent gave Stoic practice a high mark in that regard. Of course, this is a selfselected sample of people who have an interest in Stoicism and buy into at least
some of its assumptions and practices. Then again, for people who are already
somewhat committed to this particular approach to see such significant changes
in the span of a few days ought to at least encourage interested others to pay
attention.
Results like these are not entirely surprising, given that Stoicism is the
philosophical root of a number of evidence-based psychological therapies,
including Viktor Frankl’s logotherapy and Albert Ellis’s rational emotive
behavior therapy. Of Ellis it has been said that “no individual—not even Freud

himself—has had a greater impact on modern psychotherapy.” Frankl was a
neurologist and psychiatrist who survived the Holocaust and wrote the bestselling book Man’s Search for Meaning. His moving and inspiring story of
resilience can be read as a contemporary example of Stoicism in practice. Both
Ellis and Frankl acknowledged Stoicism as an important influence in developing
their therapeutic approaches, with Frankl characterizing logotherapy as a type of
existential analysis. Another compelling account of Stoicism is provided by Vice
Admiral James Stockdale in his memoir In Love and War. Stockdale famously
credited Stoicism (and in particular his readings of Epictetus) for his survival
under prolonged horrid conditions in a Vietnamese prisoner-of-war camp. Also
owing a significant debt to Stoicism is the increasingly diverse family of
practices that goes under the general rubric of cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT), which was initially deployed to treat depression and now is more widely
applied to a variety of mental conditions. Aaron T. Beck, author of Cognitive
Therapy of Depression, acknowledges this debt when he writes, “The
philosophical origins of cognitive therapy can be traced back to the Stoic
philosophers.”
Of course, Stoicism is a philosophy, not a type of therapy. The difference is
crucial: a therapy is intended to be a short-term approach to helping people
overcome specific problems of a psychological nature; it doesn’t necessarily
provide a general picture, or philosophy, of life. A philosophy of life is
something we all need, however, and something we all develop, consciously or
not. Some people simply import wholesale whatever framework for life they
acquire from a religion. Others make up their own philosophy as they go along,
without thinking too much about it, but nonetheless engaging in actions and
decisions that reflect some implicit understanding of what life is about. Still
others would rather—as Socrates famously put it—take the time to examine their
life in order to live it better.
Stoicism, like any life philosophy, may not appeal to or work for everyone. It
is rather demanding, stipulating that moral character is the only truly worthy
thing to cultivate; health, education, and even wealth are considered “preferred
indifferents” (although Stoics don’t advocate asceticism, and many of them
historically enjoyed the good things in life). Such “externals” do not define who
we are as individuals and have nothing to do with our personal worth, which
depends on our character and our exercise of the virtues. In this sense, Stoicism
is eminently democratic, cutting across social classes: whether you are rich or
poor, healthy or sick, educated or ignorant, it makes no difference to your ability

to live a moral life and thus achieve what the Stoics called ataraxia, or
tranquillity of mind.
For all its uniqueness, Stoicism has numerous points of contact with other
philosophies, with religions (Buddhism, Taoism, Judaism, and Christianity), and
with modern movements such as secular humanism and ethical culture. There is
something very appealing to me, as a nonreligious person, in the idea of such an
ecumenical philosophy, one that can share goals and at least some general
attitudes with other major ethical traditions across the world. This commonality
has allowed me to reject more forcefully the strident New Atheism that I
criticized earlier, and it also allows religious persons to distance themselves from
the even more pernicious fundamentalisms of different stripes that have been
plaguing our recent history. To a Stoic, it ultimately does not matter if we think
the Logos is God or Nature, as long as we recognize that a decent human life is
about the cultivation of one’s character and concern for other people (and even
for Nature itself) and is best enjoyed by way of a proper—but not fanatical—
detachment from mere worldly goods.
There are also, naturally, challenges that remain unresolved, and which I will
explore along with the reader in How to Be a Stoic. The original Stoicism, for
instance, was a comprehensive philosophy that included not only ethics but also
a metaphysics, a natural science, and specific approaches to logic and
epistemology (that is, a theory of knowledge). The Stoics considered these other
aspects of their philosophy important because they fed into and informed their
main concern: how to live one’s life. The idea was that in order to decide on the
best approach to living we also need to understand the nature of the world
(metaphysics), how it works (natural science), and how (imperfectly) we come
to understand it (epistemology).
But many of the particular notions developed by the ancient Stoics have
ceded place to new ones introduced by modern science and philosophy and need
therefore to be updated. For instance, as William Irvine explains in his lucid A
Guide to the Good Life, the clear dichotomy the Stoics drew between what is and
is not under our control is too strict: beyond our own thoughts and attitudes,
there are some things that we can and, depending on circumstances, must
influence—up to the point where we recognize that nothing more is in our power
to be done. It is also true, conversely, that the Stoics turned out to be overly
optimistic about how much control human beings have over their own thoughts.
Modern cognitive science has shown over and over again that we are often prey
to cognitive biases and delusions. But in my view, this knowledge reinforces the

idea that we need to train ourselves in virtuous and right thinking, as the Stoics
advised.
Finally, one of the most attractive features of Stoicism is that the Stoics were
open to considering challenges to their doctrines and altering them accordingly.
In other words, it is an open-ended philosophy, ready to incorporate criticism
from other schools (for instance, the so-called Skeptics of ancient times) as well
as new discoveries. As Seneca famously put it: “Men who have made these
discoveries before us are not our masters, but our guides. Truth lies open for all;
it has not yet been monopolized. And there is plenty of it left even for posterity
to discover.” In a world of fundamentalism and hardheaded doctrines, it is
refreshing to embrace a worldview that is inherently open to revision.
For all these reasons, I have decided to commit to Stoicism as a philosophy
of life, to explore it, to study it, to find areas of improvement if possible, and to
share it with like-minded others. In the end, of course, Stoicism is yet another
(unstraightforward) path devised by humanity to develop a more coherent view
of the world, of who we are, and of how we fit into the broader scheme of things.
The need for this sort of insight seems to be universal, and in How to Be a Stoic I
will do my best to guide the reader down this ancient and yet remarkably modern
road.
The problem is that I myself am rather a novice when it comes to Stoic
philosophy, so we actually need to turn to a more expert chaperone, someone
who can gently show us the way, nudging us away from the most common
mistakes and keeping us on the path toward enlightenment. When Dante
Alighieri went on his own spiritual journey—which resulted in the writing of the
beautiful Divine Comedy—he imagined himself suddenly lost in the middle of a
dark forest, with his way forward uncertain. It turned out that he was at the
(imaginary) entrance to Hell, about to descend into its depths. Lucky for him, he
had a sure mentor to guide him on his journey, the Roman poet Virgil. The
journey we are about to embark upon is not as momentous as a visit to Hell, and
this book certainly is no Divine Comedy, but in a sense we are lost too, and in
need of guidance just as surely as Dante was. My choice for the role of our guide
is Epictetus, the very first Stoic I encountered when I began my own exploration
of that philosophy.
Epictetus was born in Hierapolis (present-day Pamukkale in Turkey) around
the year 55 CE. Epictetus was not his real name, which is lost to us: the word
simply means “acquired,” reflecting the fact that he was a slave. His known
master was Epaphroditos, a wealthy freedman (that is, a former slave himself)

who worked as a secretary to the emperor Nero in Rome, which is where
Epictetus spent his youth. He was crippled, either by birth or because of an
injury received while he was a slave under a former master. At any rate,
Epaphroditos treated Epictetus well and allowed him to study Stoic philosophy
under one of the most renowned teachers in Rome, Musonius Rufus.
After Nero’s death in 68 CE, Epictetus was freed by his master—a common
practice in Rome with particularly intelligent and educated slaves. He then set up
his own school in the capital of the empire, and taught there until 93 CE, when
the emperor Domitian banned all philosophers from the city. (Philosophers in
general, and Stoics in particular, were persecuted by a number of emperors,
especially Vespasian and Domitian. Scores of philosophers were either killed—
including Seneca right before the end of Nero’s reign—or exiled, as happened
twice to Musonius. The Stoic penchant for speaking truth to power, as we would
say today, did not go over well with some of the people who held very dearly to
that power.)
Epictetus then moved his school to Nicopolis in northwestern Greece, where
he may have been visited by the emperor Hadrian (one of the five so-called good
emperors, the last of whom was Marcus Aurelius, arguably the most famous
Stoic of all time). Epictetus became renowned as a teacher and attracted a
number of high-profile students, including Arrian of Nicomedia, who transcribed
some of the master’s lectures. Those lectures are known today as the Discourses,
and I will use them as the basis for our exploration of Stoicism in this book.
Epictetus never married, though late in his life he began to live with a woman
who helped him raise the child of a friend, a boy who would have otherwise
been left to die. Epictetus himself died around 135 CE.
What a remarkable figure, no? A crippled slave who acquires an education,
becomes a free man, establishes his own school, is exiled by one emperor but is
on friendly terms with another, and selflessly helps a young child near the end of
a simple life that will continue until the very ripe age, especially for the time, of
eighty. Oh, and most importantly, who utters some of the most powerful words
ever spoken by any teacher in the entire Western world and beyond. Epictetus is
the perfect guide for our journey, not simply because he was the first Stoic I
happened to encounter, but because of his sensitivity and intelligence, his dark
sense of humor, and his disagreement with me on a number of important points,
which will allow me to demonstrate the remarkable flexibility of Stoic
philosophy and its capacity to adapt to times and places as different from each
other as second-century Rome and twenty-first-century New York.

So let us explore Stoicism together in a running conversation with Epictetus
via his discourses. We will talk about subjects as varied as God,
cosmopolitanism in an increasingly fractured world, taking care of our families,
the relevance of our own character, managing anger and disability, the morality
(or not) of suicide, and a lot more. Other Stoic authors, both ancient and modern,
will occasionally supplement what we learn from Epictetus, and sometimes I
will gently push back against some of our guide’s notions, bringing up advances
in philosophy and science over the intervening centuries and debating what a
modern take on Stoicism might look like. The goal is to learn something about
how to answer that most fundamental question: How ought we to live our lives?

CHAPTER 2

A ROAD MAP FOR THE JOURNEY

What is the goal of virtue, after all, except a life that flows smoothly?
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, I.4

WHEN I TRAVEL AROUND IN SOMEPLACE NEW, I LIKE TO bring along a map of the
territory. It gives me a sense of where I’m going, where I shouldn’t go, and a
context for all the things I will be experiencing during the journey. This chapter
is a map of the broad contours of Stoicism, as well as a summary of the guiding
principles that structure the rest of the book, so that you may make the most out
of this experience. I am convinced that we can hardly appreciate a philosophy or
a religion (or any complex idea, really) without some understanding of its often
nonlinear path of development, and so let’s begin with a closer look at the
history of the philosophy that we are about to explore, and which you might
decide to apply to your life.
As the story is told by Diogenes Laertius in his Lives of the Eminent
Philosophers, Stoicism began in Athens, Greece, around the year 300 BCE. Zeno,
a Phoenician merchant and native of Citium (modern-day Cyprus) who, we are
assured, was fond of eating green figs and basking in the sun, became interested
in philosophy after being shipwrecked on a voyage from Phoenicia to Peiraeus
with a cargo of purple. He went up into Athens and sat down in a bookseller’s
shop, being then a man of thirty. As he went on reading the second book of
Xenophon’s Memorabilia, he was so pleased that he inquired where men like
Socrates were to be found. Crates [a Cynic philosopher] passed by in the nick of
time, so the bookseller pointed to him and said, “Follow yonder man.”
Zeno did follow Crates and became his student. One of the first things he
learned from his new teacher was to practice not being ashamed of things of
which there is nothing to be ashamed. Crates had Zeno go around with a potful
of lentil soup. Crates then broke the pot, and Zeno took to flight in shame, with

his teacher yelling after him, in full view of a crowd: “Why run away, my little
Phoenician? Nothing terrible has befallen you.” Zeno studied under Crates and
other philosophers for several years, after which he felt confident enough to start
his own school. While initially his followers were, predictably enough, called
Zenonians, eventually they began to be referred to as “Stoics,” because they met
under the Stoa Poikile, or painted porch, a public place in the center of the city.
Anyone could come by and listen to Zeno talk about a number of topics, from
human nature to duty, law, education, poetry, rhetoric, and ethics, among others.
(We know this because, although few of Zeno’s writings have survived, the titles
of his books are listed by Diogenes Laertius.) Zeno died at a very old age (one
source says he was ninety-eight), either of a fall or, having reckoned that he was
in pain and could no longer be useful to society, by committing suicide by
starvation.
After Cleanthes, Zeno’s pupil and the second head of the Stoa, came another
pivotal figure in the history of our philosophical movement: Chrysippus of Soli,
who was a long-distance runner before he turned to philosophy. He wrote many
books about all sorts of subjects (Diogenes Laertius mentions the incredible
figure of 705!) and, more importantly, introduced a great number of new ideas—
so many in fact that the ancients used to say that “but for Chrysippus, there had
been no Porch.”
Stoicism didn’t come out of nowhere, of course. The early Stoics were
heavily influenced by previous philosophical schools and thinkers, in particular
by Socrates and by the Cynics, but also by the Academics (followers of Plato)
(see the appendix for more on these different schools of thought). They spent a
significant amount of time engaging rivals in lively debate, especially the
Academics, the Peripatetics (followers of Aristotle), and of course the
Epicureans. Epictetus, for instance, devotes three entire chapters of the
Discourses to rebutting Epicurus. Each of these schools was “eudaimonic”—that
is, their objective was to figure out the best way of living a human life. Some
emphasized virtue (the Peripatetics, the Cynics, and the Stoics), and others
pleasure (the Epicureans, the Cyrenaics) while still others were more interested
in metaphysics (the Academics) or in the limits of human knowledge (the
Skeptics). All, however, aimed at the same goal: a flourishing existence.
This went on for a while, until in 155 BCE something very important
happened to ancient philosophy: the heads of the Stoa (Diogenes of Babylon),
the Academy, and the Peripatetic school were chosen as ambassadors to
represent Athens in political negotiations with Rome. The philosophers went to

the capital of the Republic to plead for the reduction of a fine that had been
imposed three years earlier on Athens for the sack of Oropus, a small Greek city
under Roman protection. The Athenians’ visit had a great cultural impact, far
beyond its diplomatic import: the philosophers gave packed lectures in the
capital, shocking the rather conservative Roman establishment and igniting an
interest in philosophy among the Romans for the first time.
Then, during the years 88–86 BCE, two philosophers, the Peripatetic Athenion
and the Epicurean Aristion, briefly in turn gained absolute power in Athens.
(Imagine that: a philosopher turned dictator!) However, they made the
strategically fatal mistake of siding with King Mithridates against the Romans,
an alliance that eventually led to the sack of Athens. The episode spelled the end
of that venerable city as the philosophical capital of the ancient world, as major
exponents of all schools moved to quieter places, including Rhodes, Alexandria,
and especially Rome itself. It was a pivotal moment in the history of Western
philosophy.
This transitional, second period of Stoic history is referred to as the “middle
Stoa.” The great Roman orator Cicero, who was sympathetic to Stoic ideas, is
one of our major sources for both the early and the middle Stoa. Eventually, the
Roman Republic—after the death of Julius Caesar and the ascent to power of
Octavian Augustus—gave way to the Empire. Stoicism thrived as a major school
during this time, known as the “late Stoa.” Active then were all the famous
Stoics whose writings have been preserved in sizable quantities: Gaius Musonius
Rufus (Epictetus’s teacher), Seneca (the adviser to the emperor Nero), Epictetus
himself, and the emperor-philosopher Marcus Aurelius.
By the time Emperor Constantine legalized Christianity in 312 CE, Stoicism
was in decline, as were a number of other schools of thought. Eventually, the
Byzantine emperor Justinian closed the Academy in 529 CE, thus ending the
ancient Greco-Roman philosophical tradition altogether. The idea of Stoicism,
however, survived in the writings of the many historical figures who were
influenced by it (including those who were sometimes critical of it), among them
some of the Early Church Fathers, Augustine, Boethius, Thomas Aquinas,
Giordano Bruno, Thomas More, Erasmus, Montaigne, Francis Bacon, Descartes,
Montesquieu, and Spinoza. Modern Existentialism and even neo-orthodox
Protestant theology have also been influenced by Stoicism. In the twentieth
century, Stoicism saw a resurgence after the Second World War, when, as we
have seen, it inspired Viktor Frankl’s logotherapy, Albert Ellis’s rational emotive
behavior therapy, and the broad family of cognitive behavioral therapies.

Although Stoicism was designed from the beginning as a very practical
philosophy, it would not be a “philosophy” if it were not based on a theoretical
framework of some sort. That framework is the idea that in order to live a good
(in the sense of eudaimonic) life, one has to understand two things: the nature of
the world (and by extension, one’s place in it) and the nature of human reasoning
(including when it fails, as it so often does).
An ancient student of Stoicism would probably have pursued these goals by
studying physics, logic, and ethics, although each of those terms meant
something a bit different from what we mean by them today. Stoic “physics” was
the study of how the world works, and it included what we today call the natural
sciences, plus metaphysics (nowadays a branch of philosophy) and even
theology. (The Stoics believed in God, though theirs was a material God
immanent in the cosmos.) Stoic “logic” included what we today call by that
name—that is, the study of formal reasoning, to which the ancient Stoics in fact
made fundamental contributions. But it also encompassed modern epistemology
(that is, a theory of knowledge), rhetoric (the study of how to best convey ideas
to others), and psychology (in particular an understanding of how the human
mind works and how and when it fails to reason properly).
The Stoics didn’t study physics and logic for their own sake. Like Socrates
before them—and unlike a number of other philosophers then and since—they
were not interested in theory for theory’s sake. If philosophy was not useful to
human life, then it wasn’t useful at all. But how exactly were physics and logic
connected to the goal of living the good life, which was the proper object of
study of Stoic ethics? It is illuminating to realize where our words “ethics” and
“morality” come from in the first place. “Ethics” derives from the Greek êthos, a
word related to our idea of character; “morality” comes from the Latin moralis,
which has to do with habits and customs. Indeed, moralis is how Cicero
translated the Greek word êthos! So the basic idea is that a good character cannot
be properly developed, and good habits practiced, without an understanding of
the other two areas of inquiry.
The Stoics used several metaphors to get their point across. One of the most
incisive is that of a garden, introduced by Chrysippus, who said that the fruits of
the garden represent the ethics. To get good fruits we must nurture the plants
with fine nutrients: the soil of the garden, then, is the physics, providing our
understanding of the world in which we live. Moreover, our “garden” needs to
be fenced off from unwanted and destructive influences, or it will be taken over
by weeds and nothing good will grow in it: the fence is the logic, keeping bad

reasoning out of the way.
Our friend Epictetus developed his own highly original take on why the three
Stoic areas of study are important:
There are three departments in which a man who is to be good and noble
must be trained. The first concerns the will to get and will to avoid; he
must be trained not to fail to get what he wills to get nor fall into what he
wills to avoid. The second is concerned with impulse to act and not to act,
and, in a word, the sphere of what is fitting: that we should act in order,
with due consideration, and with proper care. The object of the third is
that we may not be deceived, and may not judge at random, and generally
it is concerned with assent.
These are often referred to as the three Stoic disciplines: desire, action, and
assent. They are directly related to the three areas of study—as well as to the
four virtues (discussed in detail later)—in this way:

FIGURE 2.1. The relationships among the three
Stoic disciplines (desire, action, and
assent), the three areas of inquiry
(physics, ethics, and logic), and the four
cardinal virtues (courage, temperance,
justice, and practical wisdom).

This diagram encapsulates a lot of Stoic thought, and mastering it is an
excellent way to understand what the Stoics were after. The discipline of desire
(also referred to as Stoic acceptance) tells us what is and is not proper to want.

This, in turn, derives from the fact that some things are in our power and others
are not. We can appreciate that crucial difference from an understanding of how
the world works, as only people who are not schooled in physics make the
mistake of thinking that they control more than they actually do (that is, they
engage in wishful thinking). Two of the four Stoic virtues are pertinent to
regulating desire: courage (to face facts and act accordingly) and temperance (to
rein in our desires and make them commensurate with what is achievable). The
discipline of action (known also as Stoic philanthropy, in the sense of concern
for others) tells us how to behave in the world. It is the result of a proper
understanding of ethics, the study of how to live our lives, and it draws on the
virtue of justice. Finally, the discipline of assent (or Stoic mindfulness) tells us
how to react to situations, in the sense of either giving our assent to our initial
impressions of a situation or withdrawing it. This discipline is arrived at via the
study of logic—what is and is not reasonable to think—and requires the virtue of
practical wisdom.
This book is organized around the three disciplines. We will begin with desire
—what is and is not proper to want—by studying the fundamental Stoic
distinction between what is and what is not in our power, a distinction that in
turn provides us with a useful framework for guidance in all our major life
decisions. We’ll come to appreciate why the Stoics said that we should “follow
nature,” that is, understand human nature and our place in the cosmos; play ball
(metaphorically speaking) with Socrates to aid our good living by putting
external goods (health, wealth, education), or their lack, in the proper
perspective; and examine the Stoic take on God and purpose in the universe.
The second part of the book is devoted to the exploration of the discipline of
action, or how to behave in the world. We will see why the Stoics thought that
character is what matters the most, regardless of our circumstances; why they
held that people don’t really do evil but simply have misguided views of the
world that sometimes lead them to do awful things; why they considered role
models to be crucial for our education and inspiration, and how to choose good
ones; and how Stoicism can help people in very challenging situations, including
severe physical disability and mental illness.
The third section will tackle the discipline of assent, or how to best react to
situations. This discipline comes into play with a wide variety of everyday
problems, such as anger, anxiety, and loneliness, but also in positive aspects of
our lives, like friendship and love. We shall see how the Stoics prepared
themselves for the inevitable demise at the end of life and explore their

sophisticated and nuanced thinking about the delicate issue of suicide. Finally, I
will guide you through twelve selected spiritual exercises to get you started on
your way to becoming a good student of Stoicism and as good a person as you
can be.

PART I
THE DISCIPLINE OF DESIRE: WHAT IT IS
PROPER TO WANT OR NOT TO WANT

CHAPTER 3

SOME THINGS ARE IN OUR POWER, OTHERS ARE NOT

We must make the best of those things that are in our power, and take the
rest as nature gives it.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, I.1

I CAME TO THE UNITED STATES BACK IN 1990. I KNEW LITTLE of American culture
—other than what could be gleaned growing up watching Hollywood movies
and television series dubbed in Italian—and a close friend suggested that I start
my informal education by reading a short novel by Kurt Vonnegut.
Slaughterhouse-Five, published in 1969, is a strange work. The protagonist,
Billy Pilgrim, finds himself abducted by an alien race known as the
Tralfamadorians (or so he thinks), who put him in a zoo together with another
captured earthling, the porn star Montana Wildhack. The Tralfamadorians are
capable of moving in four dimensions—the standard three in space, plus time—
and so can revisit any moment of their lives as they wish. Billy picks up this
trick from his captors and then uses it to narrate crucial moments in his life,
including the controversial Allied bombing of Dresden near the end of World
War II.
It was while reading Slaughterhouse-Five that I first encountered these
words, which are framed in Billy’s optometry office on Earth and also inscribed
in a locket worn by Montana:
God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
Courage to change the things I can,
And wisdom to know the difference.
This, of course, is the Serenity Prayer, which encapsulates our hero’s quest

throughout the book: Billy very much wants serenity, and he thinks he can
achieve it by recognizing that the past cannot be changed, that he can only affect
the here and now. This recognition takes courage—not the kind needed in battle,
but the more subtle, and yet arguably more important, kind needed to live your
life to your best.
The prayer in its modern form is attributed to Reinhold Niebuhr, an American
theologian who used it in his sermons as early as 1934. Today it’s best known
because of its use in the meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous and a number of
other twelve-step organizations. The same sentiment is detectable, however,
across centuries and cultures. Solomon ibn Gabirol, an eleventh-century Jewish
philosopher, expressed it this way: “And they said: At the head of all
understanding—is realizing what is and what cannot be, and the consoling of
what is not in our power to change.” Shantideva, an eighth-century Buddhist
scholar, similarly wrote: “If there’s a remedy when trouble strikes / What reason
is there for dejection? / And if there is no help for it / What use is there in being
glum?”
Yet there is an even more ancient version: “Make the best use of what is in
your power, and take the rest as it happens. Some things are up to us and some
things are not up to us. Our opinions are up to us, and our impulses, desires,
aversions—in short, whatever is our own doing. Our bodies are not up to us, nor
are our possessions, our reputations, or our public offices, or, that is, whatever is
not our own doing.” That one is found in Epictetus’s Enchiridion (or Handbook),
right at the beginning. Because this idea is foundational to Epictetus’s teachings,
and crucial to the whole system of Stoic philosophy going back to Zeno, we
begin our exploration of Stoicism by considering it in some detail.
The parallels between these teachings hint that the influence of Stoic wisdom
has been widespread, if often unrecognized, for many centuries. Moreover, some
of the key concepts of Stoicism are found in other philosophical and religious
traditions, including Judaism, Christianity, Buddhism, and Taoism. Some of
these parallels are the result of direct or indirect reciprocal influence, and others
represent the independent convergence of wise minds reflecting on the human
condition. Although this book is concerned primarily with Stoicism, we will
repeatedly encounter ideas that have been proposed, rediscovered, and validated
through practice by people living in very different times and cultures. Since
these are ideas that have truly withstood the test of time, we would be wise to
draw from them in our own lives.
One day not so long ago, having recently reread Vonnegut’s novel, I was

walking in the Roman Forum and thinking about the words of my wise friend
Epictetus when it occurred to me that there was a problem: he was both
conceding too much and not enough. Epictetus lists our opinions, impulses,
desires, and aversions as “up to us,” and the condition of our bodies,
possessions, and reputations and the public offices we hold as not up to us. That
can’t be right, I told him. On the one hand, my opinions are influenced by other
people through what I read, or hear, or discuss. As for my impulses, desires, and
aversions, many of them seem to spring up naturally and instinctively, and all I
have available is some veto power when it comes to translating a thought into
action. (Confirming my thought, I was distracted at that very moment by some
gorgeous-looking gelato in a shop window, but I didn’t need it, and it wouldn’t
have been good for my waistline, so I refrained from getting it.) On the other
hand, I can certainly take care of my body by, say, going to the gym and eating
healthy food; I can decide what to acquire, within my financial limits; and my
reputation is also something I can work on, with colleagues, students, friends,
and family. Moreover, even though I do not hold public office, the decision
would certainly be mine if I were to seek it, as would my efforts to put myself
forth as a candidate and work on a campaign to gather votes.
I was in the midst of articulating all this to my Stoic master when I suddenly
realized that my twenty-first-century smugness had caught up with me. Of
course Epictetus knew all this. He was no intellectual slouch. He must have
meant something different from the literal reading of his words. I’m not sure
why this surprised me, since all texts need to be interpreted against some
background information. One needs guidance to provide some context, and
luckily I had the best one available right next to me during my walk in the
Forum. I asked him: “How do you make sense of my objection?” Epictetus’s
answer came, as it often does, by way of an analogy: “We act very much as if we
were on a voyage. What can I do? I can choose out the helmsman, the sailors,
the day, the moment. Then a storm arises. What do I care? I have fulfilled my
task: another has now to act, the helmsman. If the weather is bad for sailing, we
sit distracted and keep looking continually and ask, ‘What wind is blowing?’
‘The north wind.’ What have we to do with that? ‘When will the west wind
blow?’ When it so chooses, good sir.”
As is clear from Epictetus’s example, the so-called Stoic dichotomy of
control—some things are up to us, other things are not—is really a recognition
of three levels of influence that we have over the world. To begin with, we make
certain choices, selecting some goals (the sea voyage) and what appear to us to

be the best means to obtain them (the experienced sailors). Next, we need to
recognize that it does not follow from just having made a choice that we can
implement a given course of action. Our preferred helmsman, for instance, may
be sick on that day, or his services may be too expensive for us. Finally, some
factors are entirely out of our control and we cannot even begin to influence
them, like the direction and intensity of the winds.
As it happens, I experienced a harrowingly concrete case of Epictetus’s
analogy while writing this book. With one of my brothers, I flew from Rome to
London to a festival of music and philosophy. A lot about that trip was under our
control: our agreement to go, and our acceptance of the organizers’ choice of
airline (which supplied a specific plane and “helmsman”). What was entirely
outside of our control was what happened as we were about to land at Gatwick
Airport. We were close enough to the ground to distinctly see the landing strip
when suddenly the plane’s powerful engines roared and we felt a strong
acceleration: the Airbus had abruptly halted its descent and was rapidly gaining
altitude again. This was not a good sign, but the pilot played it cool. He came on
the speaker system and told us that, because of “a traffic issue,” we were going
to turn around and resume the landing procedure. That turned out to be a
euphemism for “almost landing on top of a plane that was still on the runway we
were supposed to use,” apparently unnoticed by the control tower! Only the
prompt reflexes of the pilot and the Airbus’s powerful engines had saved our
lives—neither of which factors, obviously, we had any means to affect. I only
knew what was happening because my neighbor, sitting by the window, told me
what was unfolding in real time. Yet throughout this incident I felt strangely
calm. I’d often wondered when something dangerous would happen during my
travels. “When it so chooses, good sir.” The old philosopher was right again.
One of Epictetus’s crucial points is that we have a strange tendency to worry
about, and concentrate our energies on, precisely those things we cannot control.
On the contrary, the Stoics say, we should pay attention to the parameters in
life’s equation that we do control or influence: making sure that we have
embarked on a voyage we really want to make, and for good reasons; spending
some time researching the best crew (airline) for our ship (plane); and making
related preparations. One of the first lessons from Stoicism, then, is to focus our
attention and efforts where we have the most power and then let the universe run
as it will. This will save us both a lot of energy and a lot of worry.
Another Stoic metaphor, from Cicero, may help illustrate the point. Consider
an archer trying to hit a target. Cicero explains that the archer has a number of

things under his control: he has decided how much to train and how intensely, he
has chosen a bow and an arrow as a function of the distance and type of target,
he has aimed as best as he can, and he has chosen the exact moment when to let
the arrow go. In other words, if he has been a conscientious archer, he has done
his best up to the moment when the arrow leaves his bow. Now the question is:
will the arrow hit the target? That, very clearly, is not up to him.
After all, a sudden gust of wind could alter the course of the arrow, which
would then miss the target altogether. Or something else might unexpectedly
interpose itself between the archer and the target, say, a carriage passing by.
Finally, the target itself might move away to avoid the flying weapon—
especially if the target is an enemy soldier. That is why Cicero concluded that
“the actual hitting of the mark [is] to be chosen but not to be desired,” a
superficially cryptic statement whose meaning should by now be fairly clear: the
Stoic archer has deliberately chosen to attempt to hit the mark, and he has done
the best he can do within his power to accomplish the goal. But he is also ready
to accept a possible negative outcome with equanimity, because the outcome was
never entirely under his control. Other variables entered into it—just as happens
in pretty much anything we decide to do.
It was at this point during our conversation that I realized that what Epictetus
was telling me had countless applications to my own life. Consider, for instance,
the degree of “control” we have over our own bodies. Ever since I was little, I
have struggled with my weight. I was a chubby kid and predictably the subject
of much teasing at school. I later developed into a somewhat insecure teenager,
particularly when it came to personal relationships, and especially with girls.
I’ve gotten better over time, but the weight issue is still with me, and always will
be. Yet a Stoic perspective is very helpful here. To begin with, I had no control
over either my genetic makeup (the result of a random encounter of one of my
father’s sperm with one of my mother’s eggs) or, just as crucially, my early
developmental environment. I ate whatever my grandparents (with whom I grew
up) gave me, in whatever quantities and at whatever frequencies they deemed
appropriate. As a biologist specializing precisely in the study of nature versus
nurture, I cannot stress enough just how much our habits are shaped by the early
interaction between our genes and the environment of our infancy and
childhood.
But this is no reason to give in to fatalism and helplessness. A critical part of
growing up and maturing as an adult is asserting more control over one’s life,
including choices concerning what to eat and how much, whether to exercise and

how diligently, and so forth. Thus, probably later than would have been ideal but
nonetheless with determination, I began exercising moderately more than fifteen
years ago, to maintain muscle tone and aerobic capacity. At approximately the
same time, I also started reading about the basics of nutrition, paying attention to
food labels, and generally trying to eat well and in moderation. I probably still
slip in these habits more often than I’d like to admit, but their results have been
clearly on the positive side: I am healthier and I look better, which in turn helps
me feel psychologically better. But I still do not have—and will never have—the
kind of slim and muscular body that for others is a natural gift, or that they are
able to achieve through their own strenuous efforts (facilitated by their genetics
and early development, of course). This used to be a nagging problem and
source of frustration for me. No more. I now have internalized the Stoic attitude
that I have control over some things (what I eat, whether to exercise), but not
others (my genes, my early experiences, and a number of other external factors,
including the efficacy of my exercise regime). So the outcome—the body that I
have, the degree of health that I enjoy—is to be accepted with equanimity; it is
“chosen, but not desired,” as Cicero put it. I derive satisfaction from knowing
that, quite irrespective of the actual outcome, I’m doing my best.
The Stoic dichotomy of control applies throughout our lives. Let’s say you
are up for a promotion at your job. You think it is reasonable that you will get it,
given how many years you have been with the company, the quality of your
performance reviews, and your good relationships with your coworkers and your
boss. Suppose you are going to find out tomorrow whether you got the
promotion or not. Adopting a Stoic approach will allow you to have a night of
peaceful sleep beforehand and be ready in the morning to face whatever outcome
comes your way, not with resignation but with confidence. Your confidence lies
not in the outcome, however, for that is outside of your control. The outcome
depends on too many variables, including the internal politics of your company,
your boss’s personal sympathy (or not) toward you, and how much competition
you may have from colleagues. No, your confidence lies in knowing that you did
whatever was in your power to do, because that, and only that, is under your
control. The universe doesn’t bow to your wishes, it does what it does; your
boss, your coworkers, the shareholders of your company, your customers, and a
number of other factors are part of the universe, so why would you expect them
to do your bidding?
Or imagine you are a parent with a teenage daughter who has suddenly
turned against you, despite a happy childhood and what you thought was a

wonderful relationship. The normal reaction might be regret, for perhaps not
having done everything possible when your daughter was younger, despite the
fact that you can’t really think of what else you might have done. You also feel
powerless to control the situation and frustrated by your previously happy child
simply not responding to you anymore, even seeming (at least momentarily) to
despise you. Epictetus tells us that regret is a waste of our emotional energy. We
cannot change the past—it is outside of our control. We can, and should, learn
from it, but the only situations we can do something about are those happening
here and now. The right attitude is to derive comfort from the knowledge that
you did your best in raising your daughter—indeed, that you are still doing your
best to help her through this difficult moment in her life. Whether you succeed or
not, your levelheaded acceptance of the outcome will be best.
Notice that I am not counseling resignation. Stoicism is too often
misinterpreted as a passive philosophy, yet resignation goes precisely against not
just what the Stoics themselves said but also, more importantly, what they
practiced. The Stoics we know of were teachers, politicians, generals, and
emperors—hardly the sort of people who would have fallen into a fatalistic
torpor. Rather, they were wise enough to make the distinction between their
internal goals, over which they had control, and the external outcome, which
they could influence but not control. As the Serenity Prayer says, it is the
hallmark of a mature and wise person to realize that difference.
I keep another famous story of Stoic equanimity in mind whenever I find
myself in difficult circumstances—which, luckily for me, are usually far less
challenging than those faced by the protagonist of the story. Paconius Agrippinus
was a first-century Stoic whose father had been put to death by the emperor
Tiberius, allegedly for treason. In the year 67 CE, Agrippinus faced the same
accusation (probably also unjustified) from another emperor, Nero. Epictetus
recounts what unfolded: “News was brought him, ‘Your trial is on in the Senate!’
‘Good luck to it, but the fifth hour is come’—this was the hour when he used to
take his exercise and have a cold bath—‘let us go and take exercise.’ When he
had taken his exercise they came and told him, ‘You are condemned.’ ‘Exile or
death?’ he asked. ‘Exile.’ ‘And my property?’ ‘It is not confiscated.’ ‘Well then,
let us go to Aricia and dine.’” Agrippinus’s reaction may sound cocky, the sort of
thing an unflappable hero in a Hollywood movie (perhaps played by Cary Grant,
or Harrison Ford) might say, but unlikely to ever be uttered by an actual human
being. And yet this is precisely the power of Stoicism: the internalization of the
basic truth that we can control our behaviors but not their outcomes—let alone

the outcomes of other people’s behaviors—leads to the calm acceptance of
whatever happens, secure in the knowledge that we have done our best given the
circumstances.
Incidentally, a friend of Agrippinus’s, the senator (and Stoic) Publius Clodius
Thrasea Paetus, was also accused by Nero’s sycophants and was not so lucky. He
was given the liberum mortis arbitrium, a free choice of death, as the Romans
euphemistically put it: he was ordered to commit suicide. Accordingly, he turned
to his dining companions and calmly excused himself, retired to his bedroom,
and invited the quaestor who had brought the emperor’s order to witness while
he slit his veins. He then awaited his death while conversing with his friend
Demetrius, a philosopher of the rival school of the Cynics, about the nature of
the soul.
Agrippinus and Thrasea were obviously rather exceptional human beings,
and thankfully many of us don’t live under the rule of a capricious tyrant—
though unfortunately, such leaders are still surprisingly common two millennia
after Nero. What is important is the basic idea of the dichotomy of control and
its implications. If we take this notion seriously, it turns out that most things are
not really under our control, from small and insignificant matters to really
important ones. The logical consequence of this realization—which is also
endorsed by Buddhism and other philosophical and religious traditions—should
be to practice non-attachment to things and people. This is a tricky idea, and
another source of common misconceptions about Stoicism. Here is how
Epictetus rather bluntly explained it to me (I later realized that he meant to
momentarily stun me in order to allow my mind to open up a bit and entertain a
notion that had been alien up to that point):
What then is the proper training for this? In the first place, the principal
and most important thing, on the very threshold so to speak, is that when
you are attached to a thing, not a thing which cannot be taken away but
anything like a water jug, or a crystal cup, you should bear in mind what it
is, that you may not be disturbed when it is broken. So should it be with
persons; if you kiss your child, or brother, or friend… you must remind
yourself that you love a mortal, and that nothing that you love is your very
own; it is given you for the moment, not for ever nor inseparably, but like
a fig or a bunch of grapes at the appointed season of the year, and if you
long for it in winter you are a fool. So too if you long for your son or your
friend, when it is not given you to have him, know that you are longing

for a fig in winter time.
Pause for a minute and reread that passage before continuing. Like most
people, I’m sure you can go along with what Epictetus says about attachment
when he is talking about jugs and crystal cups—sure, of course there is no need
to get attached to objects (even though a lot of us actually are!). After all, it is
just a cup (or an iPhone), and it’s no big deal if it breaks, even if it is an
expensive cup (there is no such thing as an inexpensive iPhone). But a good
number of us recoil in horror when the philosopher shifts his discourse to our
own child, brother, or friend. How inhuman, you might say, to advise people not
to care about their loved ones! What sort of sociopath could possibly make an
analogy between my brother and a fig, whether in or out of season?
And yet, once I had time to reflect on it for a moment, I saw that Epictetus
was not counseling me not to care for my loved ones, and moreover, that he was
saying something true, as hard as it may be to swallow. Stoicism originated and
thrived in times of political instability; people’s lives could be upturned at a
moment’s notice, and death could befall anyone, at any age. Even Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, who lived at the apogee of Roman power in the century
following Epictetus and was strongly influenced by the Greek philosopher, had
his share of misfortune. Of his thirteen children, only one son and four daughters
outlived their father. And this was a family that had by far the most material
comforts, the best food, and the highest-quality medical care the age could
afford. (Marcus’s personal physician was Galen, one of the most famous doctors
of antiquity.)
More to the point, as we have already seen, Epictetus himself adopted a
friend’s son, saving the boy from what otherwise would have been certain death.
So the philosopher clearly had compassion for other people and cared for them,
even some not related to him by blood. What Epictetus was telling me, then, was
that it is best to look the reality of life straight in the face, with courage. And that
reality includes the fact that no one is immortal, no one is “ours” in the sense
that we are entitled to him or her. Understanding this is not just a way to
maintain sanity when a loved one dies, or a dear friend leaves for another
country. (Exile was common then, just as moving for economic reasons or to
escape violence and turmoil is now.) Facing this reality also reminds us to enjoy
the company and love of our fellow humans as much as possible while we can,
trying hard not to take them for granted, because it is certain that one day we and
they will be gone and the only right “season” for appreciating them will have

passed. We always live hic et nunc—here and now.
The truth of this reality was bluntly shown to me by Fate this past summer,
when I spent three days in Istanbul despite the misgivings of some family
members, who had pointed out that the city was the site of a terrible terrorist
attack just days before I was to arrive in the country. But I reckoned—correctly,
as it turned out—that the likelihood of another attack so soon after that one,
especially with the predictably heightened security in the aftermath, would make
for an acceptably low risk. What I did not take into account, however, was the
possibility of political upheaval.
One evening I was having dinner with a few friends at a wonderful Cretan
restaurant in the historic district of Istanbul when I noticed that everyone at a
nearby table, one of the few still occupied so late, was staring intensely into their
phones. My immediate interpretation was that I was witnessing yet another
example of the damaging effect of modern technology: a preference for checking
Facebook over talking to dinner companions. But it soon became clear that I
should have denied assent (as the Stoics would say) to that first impression, since
these fellow diners were both too engrossed and too visibly concerned for that
explanation to be correct. As it turned out, they were following the news that a
coup was under way. The reaction at our table was remarkably calm as we
finished the wine and kept chatting. My Turkish friends related the history of
such events in their country and described the increasingly authoritarian and
strongly pro-Islamic government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
At some point we had to decide what to do. There were rumors that all
bridges had been closed by the military; if true, that would have meant there was
no way for us to cross back to our hotel in central Istanbul. As it turned out, only
the two bridges on the Bosphorus, connecting the Asian and European sides,
were closed. So after failing to find a cab, we cautiously approached the bridge
on foot. We saw police cars blocking some streets and curious people hanging
around, wondering what to do. The good news was that social media networks
were still up (they never went down, in fact), so we could reassure our families
that we were okay, for now.
Indeed, the situation was eerily calm; people fished from the bridge while
smoking cigarettes, as they would have done any other night. Puzzled, we
reached our hotel and retired for the night. Over the next several hours we heard
helicopters and fighter jets overhead, accompanied at one point by two loud
explosions that turned out to come from nearby Taksim Square. But when we
woke up in the morning, all appeared to be almost normal, with people in the

streets (though not as many as usual) and coffee shops open (though not many
museums). The airport hadn’t reopened yet, so we kept a low profile, walking
the neighborhood and just reading and keeping an eye on the news until we were
told that our flight had been changed but was still scheduled to depart. We would
be making our way to the airport around midnight, headed for Paris and then
New York.
And here is where things got a bit more troubling. When we approached the
airport in a taxi, the streets were blocked by hundreds of people cheering the
failure of the coup, even though the whole thing had left thousands dead or
injured, mostly in the capital of Ankara and some smaller cities throughout the
country. As a general rule, it is not a good idea to be blocked in traffic in the
midst of a frenzied crowd, especially when you don’t speak the language. It’s
even more of a dispreferred indifferent when such a crowd is made up of mostly
young men roused by blood that has been shed in their own streets. And you
definitely don’t want to see your taxi driver starting to shout at another driver out
of frustration at not being able to move forward. In spite of these hazards, we
eventually made it to the terminal, checked in, and safely flew to Europe and
then to the United States.
To a student of Stoicism, the experience was first and foremost a strong
reminder of the fundamental principle of this chapter: few things are under our
control. I repeat that principle to myself every day and try to keep it constantly in
mind, but there is nothing like a sudden overturn of the social order to forcefully
bring the point home. Second, I was surprised at how calmly my companions
and I behaved throughout those twenty-four hours in Istanbul. True, we were
never in any apparent physical danger, but the situation was uncertain, and
especially once we heard explosions and military planes overhead a bit of
anxiety would not have been entirely out of place. Third, while driving through
the chanting crowd at the airport, I was reminded of just how easy it is to
manipulate people emotionally, playing on their fears and anger. It reinforced for
me the Stoic idea that such emotions should never be given assent, but always
kept in check in favor of developing more positive attitudes—such as, in this
case, by trying to rationally understand why events were unfolding as they were
and where the country was headed as a consequence. In Istanbul, the practice of
Stoicism served me well under very unusual circumstances, reinforcing the idea
that other people could benefit from it as well—even if they don’t find
themselves in the midst of a coup d’état.

CHAPTER 4

LIVING ACCORDING TO NATURE

Is our other statement then incredible—that man’s nature is civilized and
affectionate and trustworthy?
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, IV.1

THE STOICS WERE FAMOUS IN ANTIQUITY FOR INVENTING A lot of new words in order
to explain their philosophy to others, and also for being fond of short, pithy
phrases to remind themselves of their basic tenets whenever the need arose. One
such catchphrase, uttered in some form as early as Zeno of Citium, is that we
should live our lives “according to nature.”
What? I mockingly questioned Epictetus. Is Stoicism all of a sudden turning
out to be some sort of tree-hugging new-age thing? No, he calmly assured me:
“It is no ordinary task merely to fulfill man’s promise. For what is Man? A
rational animal, subject to death. At once we ask, from what does the rational
element distinguish us? From wild beasts. And from what else? From sheep and
the like. Look to it then that you do nothing like a wild beast, else you destroy
the Man in you and fail to fulfill his promise.”
That human beings are special in the animal world was perfectly clear to the
ancients. Aristotle, for one, famously said that we are the rational animal—
meaning not that we always behave rationally, since even cursory observation
proves that not to be the case, but rather that we are capable of rationality. He
also thought that we are political animals, meaning not that we engage in
political campaigns or discourse (although of course we do that as well), but that
we live and, more importantly, thrive in a polis—a community of other human
beings. From Aristotle’s insight that we are by nature both social and reasoning,
the Stoics derived the notion that human life is about the application of reason to
social living. The difference between Aristotle and the Stoics may seem subtle,
but it is crucial: Aristotle thought that contemplation is the highest purpose of

human life, because our unique function in the animal world is our ability to
think. As you might imagine, this purpose might make for a rather insular
existence, so the Stoics shifted the emphasis very much toward the social,
essentially arguing that the point of life for human beings is to use reason to
build the best society that it is humanly possible to build.
The problem these days is that the very idea of a human nature is now
somewhat in trouble. Both scientists and philosophers are increasingly
uncomfortable with the notion, and some reject it outright as the vestige of a
parochial worldview. Yet I think they are seriously mistaken in doing so.
Up until the mid-nineteenth century, people in the West thought that animals,
including humans, had been specially created, one by one, by an all-powerful
God. From this view, they didn’t have much trouble accepting what Aristotle
was saying on the matter, reinterpreted through the filter of their particular
religion: humanity is special because it is built in the image of God, and it has a
built-in purpose—carrying out whatever plan God has for the universe while at
the same time worshiping Him.
Along came Charles Darwin, who in 1859 published On the Origin of
Species. He and his colleague Alfred Russel Wallace independently amassed a
great deal of empirical evidence to buttress two revolutionary insights: first, that
all species on earth are related by common descent, like people in a family tree,
with brothers and sisters, cousins, uncles, and grandparents, reaching all the way
back to the origin of life; and second, that the bewildering variety of living forms
on earth, so exquisitely adapted to their diverse living conditions, are the result
of a fundamental process that they called “natural selection.” This process—
which has been studied and documented in both the field and the laboratory ever
since—works according to a remarkably simple algorithm. To begin with,
Darwin and Wallace noted that natural populations of animals and plants always
harbor a degree of variation in the characteristics of the individuals that make up
those populations: some are shorter, some taller; some produce greener leaves,
others less so; some are characterized by a fast metabolism, others by a slower
one; and so on. Second, it is often the case that distinct variants of any given trait
are more or less favorable in the particular environment in which the organism
happens to live. So, for instance, leaves of a certain shape are more suited to life
in the desert, where there is plenty of light but little water, while differently
shaped leaves are better adapted to life on the floor of the rain forest, where
water is abundant but light is scarce. In other words, these characteristics affect
the two things that really matter—biologically speaking—for any living being on

the planet: its survival and, even more crucially, its ability to reproduce. Finally,
there is a correlation between the characteristics of parents and their offspring,
because some traits are passed from generation to generation. (Darwin didn’t
know how this occurred, though the basic principle had been discovered at about
the same time by Gregor Mendel, whose work was not appreciated until 1900.)
If we combine these three elements—variation plus differential fitness plus
inheritance—we can deduce that, on average, fitter individuals are more likely to
survive and to produce more offspring, thus spreading their characteristics
throughout the population, at least until the environment changes and begins to
favor different characteristics. At that point, the process—which we call
“evolution by natural selection”—takes a new direction and continues on.
What does any of this have to do with human nature? The Darwinian theory
of evolution struck a deathblow to any account of humanity based on essential
characteristics, like the ones that both Aristotle and the Stoics (and pretty much
everyone else in antiquity) put forth. Epictetus was certainly right when he told
me: “From what does the rational element distinguish us? From wild beasts. And
from what else? From sheep and the like.” People are very different from “wild
beasts” and sheep. But are we so different from other primates, particularly the
great apes? Not really, according to modern biology. Our genome, to take one
measure of things, differs from that of chimpanzees by 4 to 5 percent. That is
still a lot, evolutionarily speaking, but I’m betting Aristotle would have been
surprised by how small that percentage is. Moreover, biologists have
systematically been finding that a long list of allegedly unique human traits are
actually not unique to us at all. We are not the only animals to live in
cooperatively social groups, nor the only ones to use tools. Nor are we the only
species with complex communication abilities, nor even the only ones displaying
what we would call moral behavior (which can be seen among bonobos and
other primates).
That said, we do seem to be the only animals who use language featuring
complex grammar, have babies who are born with very large brains and continue
to grow them long after birth, and have highly asymmetrical brain hemispheres,
which are specialized for different functions (including, very importantly,
language in the left one). We also have the largest brain-to-body ratio in the
mammalian world, and—this is an odd one—we are the only ape or Old World
monkey without a bone in our penis.
Looking at this (incomplete) list, you will notice that most of the entries are
quantitative, not qualitative. Our brains are larger and more asymmetrical, our

babies are bigger and grow longer after birth, and so forth. That is, these are
differences of degree, not kind, between us and other animals. Other entries
seem to be irrelevant to the point that Aristotle and the Stoics were making:
okay, we don’t have a penis bone, but that hardly has anything to do with our
rational faculties, philosophizing, or virtue. Perhaps our most promising
distinguishing trait is language, though even there people disagree on what
exactly constitutes a language, as distinct from other means of signaling and
communication.
But my rejection of biology-based skepticism about human nature does not
hinge on the quixotic search for a human essence. On the contrary, it is based on
embracing the findings of modern biology and taking them seriously. Research
has indeed shown that most or all characteristics separating different species of
living beings, including our own, are quantitative, lying along a
multidimensional continuum. But it has also clearly demonstrated that individual
members of the same species of complex, multicellular organisms—and
particularly vertebrates, of which we are an example—cluster much more tightly
together on that multidimensional continuum than they come close to similar
clusters of different species (with exceptions, because as every biologist will
readily tell you, the only law in biology is that one can always find exceptions).
This is a fancy way to say that you look and behave like a member of the species
Homo sapiens, and that it doesn’t take a biologist to tell you apart from your
closest evolutionary kin, Pan troglodytes (the chimpanzee). That is really all we
need to know to meaningfully talk about human nature: human beings are
sufficiently different from closely related species as to have their own
multidimensional set of distinguishing characteristics, and it just so happens that
a number of these traits have to do with our incredibly enhanced ability for
social cooperation, as well as with our gigantic brain power. And it is precisely
these two aspects of humanity—sociability and reason—that the Stoics insisted
on as the basis for their claim of human exceptionalism.
So much for the biology of human nature. But recently the idea of humans’
exceptionalness hasn’t fared well in some quarters of the humanities either,
especially in philosophy. The objections come from two lines of reasoning,
which we need to briefly examine before we can go back to our friend Epictetus.
Some philosophers simply deploy the same argument we have just examined,
arguing that Darwin dealt a deathblow to the idea of essentialism. Other
philosophers take the opposite route, relying not on genetics but on cultural
anthropology to conclude that humanity is so flexible in its behavior and

encompasses so much variability even across human cultures in both space and
time that we simply cannot meaningfully talk about a unified concept of human
nature.
The latter argument is a bit strange on two counts. First, if in fact human
culture was that variable, then that in itself would be a unique characteristic in
the animal world and would help—somewhat paradoxically—to distinguish
humans from other species. Second, and a bit more seriously, all human beings
do share quite a few traits that do not appear to be variable across cultures—an
indication that human behavioral plasticity is indeed limited. Some of these
shared traits include using a calendar (that is, purposefully keeping track of
time), developing a cosmology (explaining how the world is and how it came
about), engaging in divination, conducting funeral rites, adopting rules for the
inheritance of property, joking, displaying customs related to puberty, having a
concept of a soul or something like one, and tool-making. (Note that this list is
distinct from the list of characteristics that only humans have; for instance, other
species also engage in tool-making, of a sort.)
In the end, it seems that neither biological variation nor cultural diversity can
be reasonably deployed to reject what the ancients thought was obvious: we are
a very different species from anything else that planet Earth has produced over
billions of years of evolution, both for better (our stunning cultural and
technological achievements) and for worse (the environmental destruction and
the pain and suffering we have imposed on other species as well as on our own).
In particular—and this is the crucial point of interest to us here—what makes us
so different is not something as trivial as the absence of a bone. Rather, it is our
social and mental abilities—the very abilities that make it possible for me to
write the book you are reading, and that make you care about reading it.
We are now in a much better position to more accurately parse Epictetus’s
response to the questions with which we began this chapter: “For what is Man?
A rational animal, subject to death. At once we ask, from what does the rational
element distinguish us? From wild beasts. And from what else? From sheep and
the like.” His explanation to me continued: “See that you do not act like a sheep,
or else again the Man in you perishes. You ask how we act like sheep? When we
consult the belly, or our passions, when our actions are random or dirty or
inconsiderate, are we not falling away to the state of sheep? What do we
destroy? The faculty of reason. When our actions are combative, mischievous,
angry, and rude, do we not fall away and become wild beasts?” Epictetus is
affirming that what distinguishes humankind from all other species is our

capacity for rationality and arguing for an ethical precept as a result: we ought
not to behave like beasts or sheep because doing so negates our very humanity,
presumably the most precious (and natural!) thing we have. Perhaps you can
begin to see why “following nature” has nothing to do with tree-hugging.
But now we have another problem, philosophically speaking. Are Epictetus
and his fellow Stoics committing an elementary logical fallacy known as making
an “appeal to nature”? In other words, are they arguing that something is good
because it is natural, never mind that a good number of natural things are
actually quite bad for us? (Poisonous mushrooms come to mind.) The
problematic appeal to nature in the specific case of ethics has a long history,
which was crystallized by one of the major figures of the Enlightenment, the
Scottish philosopher David Hume. He observed what he thought was a peculiar
behavior:
In every system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I have
always remarked, that the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary
ways of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or makes
observations concerning human affairs; when all of a sudden I am
surprised to find, that instead of the usual copulations of propositions, is,
and is not, I meet with no proposition that is not connected with an ought,
or an ought not. This change is imperceptible; but is however, of the last
consequence. For as this ought, or ought not, expresses some new relation
or affirmation, ’tis necessary that it should be observed and explained; and
at the same time that a reason should be given, for what seems altogether
inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others,
which are entirely different from it.
This is now a classic passage in philosophy, and the problem Hume is
referring to is aptly called the is/ought gap. He is interpreted by some people
(those who emphasize “what seems altogether inconceivable, how this new
relation can be a deduction from others”) as saying that the gap cannot be
bridged, while others more modestly claim that he simply said that if an attempt
is made to bridge the gap, such a move needs to be justified (as in “’tis necessary
that it should be observed and explained; and at the same time that a reason
should be given”). Regardless of what Hume actually meant, I lean toward the
second position. It seems to me that ethics has to come from somewhere, and a
naturalistic account of it is the most promising approach. It is also the approach

used by all the Greco-Roman philosophies, and by Stoicism in particular.
In modern discussions of the roots of morality, there are, roughly speaking,
four ways to look at the issue, or what philosophers refer to as “meta-ethical”
positions: one can be a skeptic, a rationalist, an empiricist, or an intuitionist. If
you are a skeptic in this context, you are basically saying that there is no way to
know which ethical judgments are right or not. Often moral skeptics claim that
when people say, for instance, that “murder is wrong,” they are committing a
special kind of error (known as a category mistake): mixing up things that don’t
belong to each other, like a statement of fact (a murder was committed) and a
value judgment (something is wrong). Clearly, skeptics think that the is/ought
gap cannot be bridged, and that indeed facts have nothing whatsoever to do with
judgments. Needless to say, moral skeptics are not popular at dinner parties.
Rationalism is a general position in philosophy that maintains that it is
possible to arrive at knowledge by just thinking about stuff, as opposed to
observing or experimenting. Although this plays into the stereotype of the socalled armchair philosopher, don’t laugh too quickly: logicians and
mathematicians produce new knowledge by rationalist means all the time, so the
question really is whether ethics is anything like mathematics or logic. Some
people think so, while others disagree.
Often counterposed against rationalism is empiricism, the stance that we
ultimately arrive at knowledge on the basis of empirical facts—that is,
observations and experiments. Science is the ultimate empiricist discipline of
course, so to say that ethical knowledge can be arrived at empirically is to
attempt to somehow bridge the is/ought gap in a scientifically based way.
Finally, we have intuitionism, the proposition that ethical knowledge does not
require any kind of inference, whether by way of reason or observation. Instead,
it is sort of built into us in the form of strong intuitions about what is right and
wrong. How might that be? Well, for instance, I mentioned that other primates
exhibit proto-moral behaviors, such as helping nonkin who appear to be in
danger or distress. Presumably bonobo chimpanzees don’t exhibit this behavior
because they have read philosophical treatises on right and wrong. They simply
act instinctively, and that instinct was probably built into them by natural
selection because it fosters prosocial behavior, which is crucial for the survival
of small groups of primates. Because we share a recent common ancestor with
the bonobos, and because our own ancestors also lived in small bands in which
prosocial behavior was adaptive, it is not too much of a stretch to think that we
do indeed have a moral instinct, and that we have inherited it from primates that

preceded us.
The Stoic approach to ethics is interesting because it doesn’t actually fit these
four neat categories. Indeed, Stoic doctrine can be thought of as a combination
of intuitionism, empiricism, and rationalism. The Stoics, however, were most
definitely not skeptics. Stoics held a “developmental” theory of ethical concern,
according to which we begin life guided only by instincts (not reason), and those
instincts favor both self-regard and regard for the people with whom we interact
daily, usually our parents, siblings, and more or less extended family. Up to that
point, we are essentially behaving like pure intuitionists, with our ethical
intuitions built into our very nature as humans.
Gradually, we are taught to expand our concern as we approach the age of
reason—roughly speaking, when we are six-to eight-year-old children. At that
point, we begin to make clearer distinctions between our thoughts and our
actions and to have a better grasp of the world and of our place in it. From this
point on, our instincts are enhanced, and sometimes even corrected, by a
combination of self-reflection and experience—that is, by both rationalist and
empiricist processes. The Stoics thought that the more we mature
psychologically and intellectually the more the balance should shift away from
our instincts and toward the deployment of (empirically informed) reasoning.
During our conversation, Epictetus explained to me that it is “the nature of the
rational animal, that he can attain nothing good for himself, unless he contributes
some service to the community. So it turns out that to do everything for his own
sake is not unsocial.” That brought us back to human nature: Epictetus was
telling me that a fundamental aspect of being human is that we are social, not
just in the sense that we like the company of others, but in the deeper sense that
we couldn’t really exist without the help of others; the implication is that when
we do things for the good of the polity, we are actually (perhaps indirectly)
benefiting ourselves. This is a remarkably insightful account of humanity, one
that fits well with the discovery, sixteen centuries after Epictetus, that human
beings in fact evolved as a type of social primate, sharing adaptive prosocial
instincts with our cousins on the evolutionary tree.
But it is another second-century Stoic philosopher, Hierocles, who perhaps
best synthesized the school’s thinking on these matters in his Elements of Ethics,
of which, unfortunately, only fragments remain. (We also don’t know much
about Hierocles himself, except that Aulus Gellius described him as a “grave and
holy man.”) Here is how he puts it:

Each of us is, as it were, circumscribed by many circles.… The first,
indeed, and most proximate circle is that which everyone describes about
his own mind as a centre.… The second from this, and which is at a
greater distance from the centre, but comprehends the first circle, is that in
which parents, brothers, wife, and children are arranged.… Next to this is
that which contains the common people, then that which comprehends
those of the same tribe, afterwards that which contains the citizens.… But
the outermost and greatest circle, and which comprehends all the other
circles, is that of the whole human race.… It is the province of him who
strives to conduct himself properly in each of these connections to collect,
in a certain respect, the circles, as it were, to one centre, and always to
endeavor earnestly to transfer himself from the comprehending circles to
the several particulars which they comprehend.
Being a Stoic, and hence of a practical bent, Hierocles even suggested how to
behave in a way that helps us internalize the concept that the people in the
various circles are of concern to us. For instance, he advised his students to refer
to strangers as “brother” or “sister” or, if they were older, as “uncle” or “aunt,”
as a constant reminder that we should treat other people as if they really are our
relatives, as reason counsels that we are all in the same boat together, so to
speak. Even today a number of cultures have similar customs, having
independently arrived at Hierocles’s insight into human psychology.

FIGURE 4.1. The Stoic idea of
cosmopolitanism, visualized as
contracting circles of concern, according
to the second-century philosopher

Hierocles. The idea is to train ourselves to
treat people in the outer circles the way
we treat people from the inner circles.

The Stoics perfected this idea of ethical development and called it oikeiôsis,
which is often translated as “familiarization with” or “appropriation of” other
people’s concerns as if they were our own. This led them (and the Cynics who
immediately preceded them and influenced them greatly) to coin and use a word
that is still crucial to our modern vocabulary: cosmopolitanism, which literally
means “being a citizen of the world.” Or as Socrates—arguably the most
important influence on all Hellenistic schools of philosophy—put it: “Never…
reply to one who asks [your] country, ‘I am an Athenian,’ or ‘I am a Corinthian,’
but ‘I am a citizen of the universe.’”

CHAPTER 5

PLAYING BALL WITH SOCRATES

Material things are indifferent, but how we handle them is not indifferent.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, II.5

WHEN WE TALKED ABOUT “LIVING ACCORDING TO NATURE” in the previous chapter, I
mentioned that the Stoics had a fondness for pithy summaries of their
philosophy. I find this to be an endearing aspect of their thinking, for a couple of
reasons. First, it is a forceful reminder that they were interested in practice, not
just theory: their aphorisms were meant to benefit the prokoptôn, that is, to help
the student of Stoicism make progress. Unlike modern bumper stickers, T-shirt
slogans, and so forth, which primarily signal membership in a particular group
and tend to be used as a metaphorical club with which to beat those who are not
like-minded, Stoic stock phrases were employed by practitioners as personal
reminders, as aids for daily meditation, or as a guide to behavior when they were
in doubt. Stoicism, in other words, was not meant to be worn on your sleeve
(unless you were someone, say a teacher, who couldn’t avoid doing so). Marcus
Aurelius carried this attitude to the extreme: his famous Meditations were
written as a personal diary of reflection, not as a book meant for publication, and
in antiquity the work was known as Ta Eis Heauton, which simply means “To
Himself.”
I also like Stoic aphorisms because these short sentences are often
superficially paradoxical and can be taken in one of two ways: on the one hand,
as a perennial source of frustration, since the Stoic must constantly explain
herself to others who keep misunderstanding what her philosophy is about, and
on the other hand, as an opportunity for a teaching moment: asked about one of
these “paradoxes,” the Stoic has the perfect opening to move from the bumper
sticker level to at least the level of an elevator speech, which seems to be the
most that much modern conversation allows, be it in person or on social media.

Perhaps the most paradoxical of these phrases is “preferred indifferents” (and
“dispreferred indifferents”). Since the category “indifferent” pretty much
encompasses everything outside of an individual’s excellence of character, or
virtue, then we better get clear on what exactly the Stoics meant by this.
As usual, I asked Epictetus to clarify, this time during a nice walk in the
Casal Palocco area of Rome, where there happens to be a street named after him.
(That surprised the hell out of my friend, who is very modest by nature.) As he
often does, he referred me to Socrates, who was a major influence on Stoic
thought: “[Socrates] was like one playing at ball. What then was the ball that he
played with? Life, imprisonment, exile, taking poison, being deprived of his
wife, leaving his children orphans. These were the things he played with, but
none the less he played and tossed the ball with balance. So we ought to play the
game, so to speak, with all possible care and skill, but treat the ball itself as
indifferent.”
Let me unpack this analogy, which is clearly between one’s life and playing
ball. I’m not sure which game Epictetus was referring to, but let’s say it was
Greco-Roman soccer. The point of the analogy is that the ball itself, though
central to the game and apparently the focus of everyone’s attention, is actually
indifferent—meaning that it could take a variety of colors and shapes, be made
of different materials, or be of different sizes, but it isn’t valuable in itself. The
ball is only a means to an end and isn’t the important thing—it is what one does
with the ball that defines the game, how well it is played, and who wins or loses.
Indeed, a good player does not have rigid ideas about how to handle the ball,
when or to whom to pass it, and so on. The best players are those who display
fantasia (creativity), who are imaginative about what they do on the field, and
who find new ways to turn difficult situations to their favor, making the obstacle
the way, to paraphrase Marcus Aurelius. Moreover, the hallmark of an admirable
player isn’t that he wins games, but that he plays his best regardless of the final
outcome, which, after all, is not under his control.
Likewise with Socrates: Fate handed him certain materials to play with,
including the time and place of his birth, the political system and situation of
Athens in the fifth century BCE, and so forth. He strove to live a good life, doing
his military duty during the Peloponnesian War and teaching his fellow citizens
about philosophy. When Meletus, with the shady support of Anytus and Lycon,
accused him of “impiety” (that is, not believing in the state’s official gods), he
stood in front of his fellow citizens to argue his case—even though it was clear
that the charges stemmed from a combination of political and personal vendettas

on the part of his accusers.
After he was condemned to death by the tribunal of the people, Socrates had
an easy opportunity to escape thanks to his friends, who were more than willing
to bribe the guards (a rather common practice, and not only in those times).
Instead, he turned the occasion into an explanation of his duties toward the city
that had given him birth and nurtured him his whole life. In Plato’s Crito,
Socrates tells his distraught friends that he has a moral duty to accept the law
even when it is patently misused, because we don’t get to change the rules when
they happen not to suit us. He is therefore willing to take the poison and leave
his friends, students, wife, and child in order not to compromise his integrity,
which is the important thing; all else is “indifferent,” not in the sense that
Socrates didn’t care about his friends and family (or, for that matter, his own
life), but in the deeper sense that he was not willing to compromise his virtue in
order to save his skin, or even to spare his loved ones suffering. As Epictetus
told me during our conversation: “How do I know what is going to turn up? My
business is to use what does turn up with diligence and skill.… It is for you,
then, to take what is given you and make the most of it.”
A modern-day analogy may be made here with the American whistleblower
Edward Snowden. As is well known, Snowden was a contractor for the US
National Security Agency. In 2013 he released a number of classified documents
that exposed a broad, and arguably illegal, surveillance system enacted by the
NSA, which has since led to a much-needed debate on the balance between
surveillance and democratic values in an open society. Predictably, the very
mention of Snowden tends to generate polarized responses, just as Socrates’s
name did in his time: for some he is a hero, for others a traitor, and in fact he
may well be considered both. Quite irrespectively of whether what Snowden did
was morally right or not—again, similar to the question of whether Socrates’s
teachings and political actions were right or not—we can reasonably wonder
about the ethics of Snowden seeking asylum abroad (at the moment of this
writing in Russia, of all places) rather than facing the two charges of violating
the 1917 Espionage Act that the US government has leveled against him. I
honestly do not know the answer. Socrates decided to stay, and Snowden decided
not to return, but even if you think that Snowden should have faced the
consequences (right or not) of his actions, we can all probably agree that few
people have risen to the moral stature of Socrates—which is why he is one of the
standard role models used by Stoics.
Luckily, most of us will not face the morally treacherous terrain on which

Socrates and Snowden found themselves. Nonetheless, we have plenty of
opportunities to decide how to play the balls thrown in our direction by life. Let
me give you a couple of trivial examples. Not long after my conversation with
Epictetus, I happened to need some cash for personal expenses, so I went around
the corner from my apartment in New York, accessed the ATM of the local
branch of my bank, and got the money. And then I froze in my tracks. You see, if
you hang around Stoics, you soon discover that everything has an ethical
dimension. In this case, I suddenly remembered that my bank had notoriously
been involved in a number of shady practices (for example, questionable
investments and financial tools), directed toward both their own employees and
society at large. That meant that my preferred indifferent—being able to
conveniently get cash from my account whenever I need it—was actually in
tension with my implicit support of labor and social practices that I oppose in
principle. Oops.
As a result of that reflection, I walked into the bank’s branch and explained to
a baffled customer representative that I was closing my account, not because I
was dissatisfied with the level of service (which was actually excellent), but
because I had irreconcilable differences with the bank about how they were
using what was, after all, my money. I then did some research and found a bank
that, though most certainly not ethically impeccable, was unquestionably better
than the one I had just ditched. I brought my business to them, and I have been
feeling a little better ever since.
Similarly, I grew up a complete omnivore in Italy, with parents and
grandparents who couldn’t really wrap their minds around the word
“vegetarian.” I am not a vegetarian even today, but I’ve gradually started paying
more attention to where my food comes from, and at what cost in terms of
animal suffering, environmental impact, and human labor. It is a complex
problem, with no easy solution and plenty of conflicts among distinct
indifferents. For instance, contra to the standard vegetarian argument, it is not at
all easy to calculate just how many animals suffer and die when you take up a
vegetarian diet, because large-scale cultivation of plant species for human
consumption radically alters the environment of the planet, depriving a number
of wild animal species of vital ecological space. If you think that eating local and
organic is sustainable, you may be in for a surprise when you look at the relevant
literature or do a bit of back-of-the-envelope calculation. Even the activistjournalist Michael Pollan, author of the best-selling The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A
Natural History of Four Meals, agrees that we cannot feed billions of people on

the kind of diet that he and I can afford and easily find at our local green grocery
shops. Then again, to argue that we have a right to eat whatever we fancy,
regardless of the demonstrably immense levels of suffering and environmental
damage we inflict in the process, seems more than a bit callous.
This dilemma is probably why a number of Stoics were in fact vegetarian.
Take Seneca, who wrote that “I was imbued with this [vegetarian] teaching, and
began to abstain from animal food; at the end of the year the habit was as
pleasant as it was easy. I was beginning to feel that my mind was more active.”
Seneca eventually abandoned vegetarianism because he did not want to be
associated with a particular political faction that had adopted the practice. Was
he then just an opportunist, or at the very least morally weak? Not necessarily.
We do not know the details, but he may have calculated that sticking to a
vegetarian diet would have done less good for the world (which for him meant,
of course, Roman society) than choosing to differentiate himself from that
particular political party. Being vegetarian, in and of itself, is no proof of
superior moral quality, but it is a good thing to do if other considerations do not
outweigh that choice. And it is the hallmark of a wise person to be able to
navigate a complex situation otherwise characterized by no easily identifiable,
optimal course of action.
Musonius Rufus, Epictetus’s teacher, was famous for being a particularly
practical Stoic who gave his students advice on everything from the important
things in life (such as the idea that women ought to get the same education as
men) to somewhat trivial matters, like how to furnish your house (efficiently,
with stuff that doesn’t break easily) or cut your hair (removing only what is
useless). He had a lot to say about diet too. He argued that “although there are
many pleasures which persuade human beings to do wrong and compel them to
act against their own interests, the pleasure connected with food is undoubtedly
the most difficult of all pleasures to combat,” adding: “To obtain those few
moments of gastronomic pleasure, countless expensive foods must be prepared
and brought overseas from distant lands. Cooks are more highly valued than
farmers. Some people spend all their possessions to have their banquets
prepared, but they are not made stronger by eating these expensive foods.…
When it comes to food, responsible people favor what is easy to obtain over
what is difficult, what involves no trouble over what does, and what is available
over what isn’t.”
Now this strikes very close to home for me, and it is an excellent example of
how the Stoics saw life’s preferred indifferents. As I mentioned, I grew up in

Rome and live in New York. Indeed, I am writing this book during a sabbatical
from my home institution, a leave of absence that I’m spending in the Eternal
City, partly to get inspired by almost daily walks to the Colosseum, the Forum,
and other sights, but partly to enjoy the company of my family and, yes, the
delicious food my hometown readily offers! My partner and I also take
advantage of all the good restaurants in the Big Apple, including a number of
expensive ones where the cooks are definitely better paid than the farmers and
where, to obtain a few moments of gastronomic pleasure, countless expensive
foods must be prepared and brought overseas from distant lands. It seems like
my choices at this point are rather limited, and somewhat unpleasant: either I
should frankly admit that for all this talk about Stoicism, I’m actually an
epicurean (in the modern, small-e sense of the word) and therefore a hypocrite,
or I should give up fine dining in the name of logical consistency, thus relegating
myself to what others may consider a joyless life while surrounded by culinary
pleasures of all kinds in which I refuse to partake.
But one of the first things you learn if you study philosophy is that there
rarely is such a thing as a sharp dichotomy in any but the more trivial matters. In
fact, when I teach informal logic, I warn my students that more often than not, if
someone is presenting them with just one of two forced choices, that person is
probably committing what is called the fallacy of false dichotomy—he’s not
telling them that other options are available. (Of course, in some cases there
really are only two options, and being forced to face a narrow choice is no
logical error, but the general point holds.) In this case, for instance, cheap,
delicious, and healthy meals can be found in Rome, prepared by local cooks
using seasonally available ingredients—thus satisfying Musonius’s
requirements. It is also possible to find such meals in New York, of course, but
there the temptation to splurge on seriously (perhaps outrageously) expensive
meals, which are far better described as “culinary experiences,” is great. That is
where I decided to draw the line, within limits. I told my partner and my closest
friends that I’d rather not go to, say, Eleven Madison Park, if it could be avoided.
Which of course is possible most of the time. But not all the time: if a dear
friend, or my companion, were to tell me that once in a lifetime they really want
to have the Eleven Madison Park experience—say, to celebrate a very special
occasion—and would be greatly disappointed if I didn’t join them, I might
consider it. That’s not hypocrisy or rationalization, I think, but rather a balancing
of competing demands that stem from different ethical criteria: supporting a type
of operation of which I do not approve versus disappointing someone I love.

(Remember that I am using the Greco-Roman understanding of “ethics,” which
had a much broader meaning than the modern word.) The reasonable thing to do
—and Stoics were all about applying reason to everyday affairs—might be to
compromise: yes, we’ll go this one time, but we’ll make up for it in some
fashion, like doubling our efforts to patronize locally sourced and
environmentally and labor friendly eateries for the rest of the year. Will I feel
uncomfortable during that evening of celebration? Probably, but as the emperor
Marcus Aurelius said—and he wasn’t kidding or being sarcastic—“If [you] must
live in a palace, then [you] can also live well in a palace.”
Generally speaking, then, Stoic ethics isn’t just about what we do—our
actions—but more broadly about how our character is equipped to navigate real
life. We live in far too intricate social environments to be able to always do the
right thing, or even to do the right thing often enough to know with sufficient
confidence what the right thing is to begin with. Most of the different demands
made on us have an ethical dimension (animal suffering, environmental damage,
the treatment of waiters), but some are also more practical (I need to eat, but
where is my food coming from? I need to bank, but which bank am I
supporting?). Stoicism is about developing the tools to deal as effectively as
humanly possible with the ensuing conflicts, does not demand perfection, and
does not provide specific answers: those are for fools (Epictetus’s word) who
think the world is black and white, good versus evil, where it is always possible
to clearly tell the good guys from the bad guys. That is not the world we live in,
and to pretend otherwise is more than a bit dangerous and not at all wise.
That said, let me return to the idea of indifferents, and their classification as
“preferred” or “dispreferred,” by contrasting Stoicism with two other important
Hellenistic schools of thought: Aristotelianism and Cynicism (the latter being a
word that, even more so than Stoicism and Epicureanism, has a different
meaning today than it did then—which is why I capitalize the words in reference
to the philosophies and lowercase them otherwise).
Aristotle was a student of Plato (and hence a grand-student of Socrates, so to
speak), and his philosophy was characterized by a very practical, if somewhat
elitist, approach. In his version of virtue ethics, a eudaimonic life is made
possible by the pursuit of virtue, but we also need many other things over which
we have no control: health, wealth, education, and even good looks.
Contrast this with the thinking of the first Cynic, Antisthenes, himself a
student of Socrates. Antisthenes, and even more so his famous successor,
Diogenes of Sinope, went radical: for them, nothing is necessary for a

eudaimonic life except virtue. We may be healthy or sick, wealthy or poor,
educated or ignorant, handsome or ugly—none of it matters. Indeed, they went
so far as to argue that earthly possessions positively get in the way of virtue: they
develop in us an attachment to things that don’t matter, so we are better off
without them.
Diogenes seriously practiced what he preached. His lifestyle could be
characterized as in-your-face ascetic, as he made a show of sleeping in a tub in
the streets of Athens, defecating and copulating in public (hence the term
“Cynic,” which means doglike), and carrying little or nothing for his own
survival and comfort. There are wonderful stories about Diogenes. One tells us
that he was thirsty one day, and so pulled out a bowl while approaching some
running water. He then saw a boy helping himself to the water by simply
cupping his hands to hold the liquid. Diogenes threw away his bowl in disgust,
muttering that even a boy was wiser than him. On another occasion, he was
visited by Alexander the Great, who had heard of the famous philosopher and
went to pay his respects (presumably, in front of the tub). When Alexander
magnanimously (or so he thought) asked Diogenes what he, the most powerful
man in the world, could do on behalf of the philosopher, the latter looked up and
said something along the lines of “you could move, you are blocking my sun.”
That ought to give you an idea of why the Cynics were both much admired and
much despised.
Now here is the problem: On the one hand, we have Aristotle telling us that
eudaimonia can be achieved only by somewhat lucky people who fit a number of
prerequisites, acquired through little or no merit of their own. On the other hand,
we’ve got the Cynics not only rejecting Aristotle’s list of necessary prerequisites
but arguing that they get in the way of a good life. Stoics occupy the logical
space in between these two positions: health, wealth, education, and good looks
—among other things—are preferred indifferents, while their opposites—and a
number of other things—are dispreferred indifferents. This, I think, was a stroke
of genius. The Stoics made a eudaimonic life a reachable goal for everyone,
regardless of social status, financial resources, physical health, or degree of
attractiveness. Although all of these qualities are indifferent to your ability to
pursue a virtuous life—to become a morally worthy person—they are still
preferred (just as any normal human being would readily tell you) so long as
they don’t get in the way of your practice of the virtues. Here is how Seneca
aptly summarized the idea in the case of a particularly common contrast between
preferred and dispreferred experiences: “There is great difference between joy

and pain; if I am asked to choose, I shall seek the former and avoid the latter.
The former is according to nature, the latter contrary to it. So long as they are
rated by this standard, there is a great gulf between; but when it comes to a
question of the virtue involved, the virtue in each case is the same, whether it
comes through joy or through sorrow.” In other words, by all means go ahead
and avoid pain and experience joy in your life—but not when doing so imperils
your integrity. Better to endure pain in an honorable manner than to seek joy in a
shameful one.
There is a way to understand this point in very modern parlance, using the
language of economic theory, of all things. Economists have developed the
concept of lexicographic preferences, so called because they work in a fashion
similar to the ordering of words in a dictionary to describe situations where
people want incommensurable goods—that is, goods that cannot be compared to
each other in terms of value. Let’s say that I value goods 1 and 2, which belong
to category A, but also goods 3, 4, and 5, which belong to category B. While 1
and 2 can be compared and contrasted, and the same goes for 3, 4, and 5, no
good belonging to A is comparable to any good belonging to B, and anything
from A has complete precedence over anything from B. The result is that goods
can be traded within either A or B, but not across these categories. Here the
pursuit of virtue is in category A, while the preferred indifferents are in category
B. Within B, you may well trade things off: money for education, a good career
for family life, and so forth. But for a Stoic, there is no trade-off between A and
B: nothing can be traded if the price is the compromising of your character. This,
incidentally, means that there are contrasts between goods—such as virtue versus
physical health—to which standard economic theory simply does not apply.
This may sound strange, but a moment’s reflection will show that we all
already use lexicographic indexing for many of our choices. You might like, say,
the idea of going on vacation in a nice resort in the Caribbean. And because
going on vacation and spending money are on the same lexicographical level,
you are willing to trade off some of your hard-earned money in order to achieve
that goal. But I assume that you wouldn’t sell your daughter for any purpose at
all, and certainly not just to enjoy a vacation. That’s because your daughter
belongs to a higher lexicographical level, one that is incommensurable with
vacations, as pleasant and needed as the latter may be.
Regardless of whether we express it in philosophical or economic terms, this
Stoic concept is quite empowering. If you follow Aristotle (and, let’s be frank, a
lot of what passes for common sense), you need to be part of the lucky elite or

you won’t have a good life. This outlook puts most people on the perennially
losing side of things, condemning them to the pursuit of material goods because
they mistakenly think that their happiness and worth depend on acquiring them.
Psychologists call this the hedonic treadmill: you keep running, but you ain’t
goin’ nowhere. By contrast, everyone can have a good life according to the
Cynics, but few of us are inclined to spend it living in a tub and defecating in the
streets. The Stoic compromise—their lexicographic contrast between the virtues
and the preferred indifferents, coupled with their treatment of the two as
hierarchically ordered, incommensurable classes of goods—brilliantly
overcomes the problem, retaining the best of both (philosophical) worlds.

CHAPTER 6

GOD OR ATOMS?

What then is the nature of God? Is it flesh? God forbid. Land? God forbid.
Fame? God forbid.
It is intelligence, knowledge, right reason.
In these then and nowhere else seek the true nature of the good.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, II.8

I DO HAVE A MAJOR DISAGREEMENT WITH MY FRIEND EPICTETUS, and yet the fact that
we can have such diverging opinions on a fundamental matter and still see eye to
eye about how to live our lives is one of the most precious features of Stoicism:
it makes room for both religious believers and unbelievers, united by their
common understanding of ethics regardless of their diverging metaphysics.
When I asked Epictetus about his view of God, he replied: “Who is it that has
fitted the sword to the scabbard and the scabbard to the sword? Is there no one?
Surely the very structure of such finished products leads us commonly to infer
that they must be the work of some craftsman, and are not constructed at
random. Are we to say then that each of these products points to the craftsman,
but that things visible and vision and light do not? Do not male and female and
the desire of union and the power to use the organs adapted for it—do not these
point to the craftsman?” This is a remarkable early example (since it was written
in the second century CE) of what is known as the argument from design to
support the existence of God. A variation of it was later used by prominent
Christian theologians, such as Thomas Aquinas, and it is perhaps best known in
the formulation of the nineteenth-century natural theologian William Paley, who
articulated it just a few decades before Darwin wrote On the Origin of Species:
In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, and were
asked how the stone came to be there; I might possibly answer, that, for

anything I knew to the contrary, it had lain there forever: nor would it
perhaps be very easy to show the absurdity of this answer. But suppose I
had found a watch upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the
watch happened to be in that place; I should hardly think of the answer I
had before given, that for anything I knew, the watch might have always
been there.… There must have existed, at some time, and at some place or
other, an artificer or artificers, who formed [the watch] for the purpose
which we find it actually to answer; who comprehended its construction,
and designed its use.… Every indication of contrivance, every
manifestation of design, which existed in the watch, exists in the works of
nature; with the difference, on the side of nature, of being greater or more,
and that in a degree which exceeds all computation.
The argument is intuitively very powerful, and likely to be brought up by
most believers as a first response to the question of why they believe. It is also,
predictably, the argument against which atheists have often concentrated most of
their firepower. It is not my intention to convince the reader one way or the
other, as this book isn’t about apologetics, and even less so about atheism. I
would be intellectually dishonest, however, if I did not put forth my own
opinion, just as I did during my friendly chat with Epictetus. This is what good
philosophers—and reasonable people in general—are supposed to do: listen to
each other’s arguments, learn and reflect, and go out for a beer to talk it over
some more.
My considered opinion is that Epictetus’s argument (and Aquinas’s and
Paley’s) was eminently reasonable until sometime between the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries. What happened then was that two brilliant minds, one a
philosopher, the other a scientist, dealt a powerful double punch to the argument
from design. Those punches did not deliver a win by knockout (that rarely
happens in philosophy), but I think the argument, though still vigorously
defended by a number of theologians, philosophers, and even some scientists,
has lost a significant amount of its appeal.
The first cogent attack on the argument from design came from David Hume,
who wrote: “If we see a house… we conclude, with the greatest certainty, that it
had an architect or builder because this is precisely that species of effect which
we have experienced to proceed from that species of cause. But surely you will
not affirm that the universe bears such a resemblance to a house that we can with
the same certainty infer a similar cause, or that the analogy is here entire and

perfect.” Hume’s point is subtle but crucial: he is basically saying that arguments
from analogies, of which the one from design is an example, are notoriously
problematic because analogies are always imperfect, and in some cases
downright misleading.
More precisely, Hume acknowledges that if we see a manufactured object, we
are justified in inferring the existence of a human maker, but only because we
have actually seen, or have otherwise incontrovertible evidence of, people
making things. In the case of the universe, however, we have never seen one
being created, nor do we have any knowledge of the existence of a Creator to
begin with—indeed, that is precisely the point under contention: how did the
cosmos come about? Moreover, if a Creator does exist, we have no idea of its
attributes. Accordingly, Hume continued with a bit of mischievousness (which
was dangerous at the time when he was writing). If we take the analogy between
human and cosmic designers seriously, he argued, then we have to conclude that
the latter have the following properties: there are many of them, they are fallible,
and they are mortal—all suggestions that do not go at all well with a standard
Christian theological account of God.
Although Hume developed a powerful counterargument against the appeal to
design—one that is still studied in introductory philosophy courses today—he
was missing something rather big: an alternative explanation for the undeniable
appearance of design in the world, particularly the biological world. That
missing piece was provided less than a century later by the great biologist
Charles Darwin. His theory of evolution by natural selection is even now
accepted as the scientific explanation of why eyes and hands and hearts and
lungs do look like watches and swords, and yet are the product of natural
phenomena that do not in fact require intelligent design. Moreover, Darwin
combined his explanation of the appearance of design with the unanswered
question of the existence of suffering in the world, another much-debated topic.
As he explained in a famous letter: “But I own that I cannot see, as plainly as
others do, & as I shd [sic] wish to do, evidence of design & beneficence on all
sides of us. There seems to me too much misery in the world. I cannot persuade
myself that a beneficent & omnipotent God would have designedly created the
Ichneumonidae with the express intention of their feeding within the living
bodies of caterpillars, or that a cat should play with mice. Not believing this, I
see no necessity in the belief that the eye was expressly designed.”
Of course, Epictetus had not read Hume or Darwin, so I pointed out
especially the last passage to him, and he responded in quintessential Stoic

fashion. Remembering that one day one of his students who had a wounded leg
had complained about his injury—saying, “Am I then to have a maimed leg?”—
he told me that his response had been, shall we say, rather matter-of-fact: “Slave,
do you mean to arraign the universe for one wretched leg?” (Epictetus also often
called me “slave,” or “boy,” which, though somewhat politically incorrect, I find
both endearing and fundamentally unobjectionable: he himself was a slave, and I
am indeed significantly younger than him!)
Since this is an important aspect of Stoic metaphysics, it is worth examining
a bit more carefully. Although Epictetus was arguably the most religious Stoic
on record, he certainly didn’t think that God should concern Himself with every
minutia pertaining to human affairs (much less with Ichneumonid insects, had he
known about them), as is clear from his quip about the audaciousness of
someone pretending that the whole universe should be rearranged so that his leg
will not hurt. More importantly, many of the Stoics did not believe in anything
like the modern monotheistic conception of God. Their preferred word for it was
Logos, which can be interpreted as the Word of God (as the Christians who
inherited a lot of Stoic philosophy did), or as a kind of Providence embedded in
the very fabric of the universe, or even more simply as the rather straightforward
observation that the cosmos can be understood rationally, regardless of how it
came to be. Epictetus himself very clearly told his students that he did not think
God was something external, something “out there”: “You are a principal work,
a fragment of God Himself, you have in yourself a part of Him.… You bear God
about with you, poor wretch, and know it not. Do you think I speak of some
external god of silver or gold?” In this sense, the Stoics can be thought of as
pantheistic (or perhaps panentheistic)—that is, as believing that God is the
universe itself and therefore we all partake in the divine nature. The only
difference between human beings and other animals is that we are capable of the
highest attribute of God/Universe: reason. That is why the proper way to live our
lives is by using reason to tackle our problems.
This identification of God with Nature has a long history, and it was
developed particularly by the influential seventeenth-century Dutch philosopher
Baruch Spinoza. It is sometimes referred to as “Einstein’s God,” because a
similar sentiment was expressed by the famous physicist. There are two related
points to be noted about this conception of God: first, the divinity doesn’t engage
in miracles; this God does not suspend the laws of nature in order to intervene
here and there to right local wrongs. Second, and relatedly, there is very little
practical difference between this God and a simple acknowledgment (made by

the Stoics) that the universe works through a web of cause and effect; this very
modern concept is entirely compatible with the scientific view of the world as
we understand it. Thus, we can similarly interpret Epictetus’s somewhat flippant
answer to the student with the maimed leg in two ways: either to mean that God
concerns Himself with the workings of the universe as a whole, not of every
specific part, and that it is therefore presumptuous to complain about one’s own
issues; or to mean that the wound resulted from a series of causes and effects that
certainly did not have the student’s well-being in mind when they occurred, so it
is futile to remonstrate against the outcome. Either way, to ask for things to be
otherwise would indeed be to pretend to arraign the universe for the sake of one
wretched leg. Moreover, such a petition would of course be a flagrant violation
of the principle of the dichotomy of control, which we have seen is fundamental
to Epictetus’s teachings.
Epictetus replied to me that he was aware of the different opinions
concerning the gods, but insisted that he could make sense of only one of them:
Concerning the gods there are some who say that the Divine does not
exist, others that it exists but is inactive and indifferent and takes no
thought for anything, others again that God does exist and take thought
but only for great things and things in the heavens, but for nothing on
earth; and a fourth class say that God takes thought also for earthly and
human things, but only in a general way, and has no care for individuals:
and there is a fifth class, to whom belong Odysseus and Socrates, who
say: “where’er I move / Thou seest me.” For if there are no gods, how can
following the gods be the end of man? If again there are gods, but they
care for nothing, in that case too what good will it be to follow them?
As much as I admire the prose, here I reminded him that Stoicism does not
actually maintain that the end of man is to follow the gods. That was his own
version. What the Stoics, including Epictetus, said, as we have seen, is that we
should live our lives while following nature, and it is reasonable to equate this
with following the gods only once we have clarified the relationship between
nature and the gods—which Epictetus never really did. In fact, there was
disagreement on this point both among Stoics and between them and rival
schools, such as the Epicureans. The followers of Epicurus are often portrayed as
“atheists,” but they were nothing of the kind. They were what we today would
call deists, falling into the third group enumerated by Epictetus: according to

them, God does exist, but He is immersed in the contemplation of divine things,
paying no heed at all to earthly matters and human affairs. The world, for the
Epicureans, is made of a chaos of atoms randomly bumping into each other, and
while human beings are capable of using reason, their decisions and actions are
still held hostage, not to a divine providence, but to the effects of physical forces.
Some Stoics conceded this possibility, and others went so far as to
appropriate some of Epicurus’s thoughts and maintain—correctly—that
philosophy isn’t religion, it has no sacred texts, and it does not follow
unquestionable doctrines. On the contrary, as Seneca aptly put it, “That which is
true is mine,” meaning that a reasonable person makes truth her own, regardless
of whether it comes from friends or foes.
One of the Stoics who agreed with Epictetus’s general take on the divine, but
was more open-minded than him on such matters, was none other than the
emperor-philosopher Marcus Aurelius. It seems clear that Marcus believed in
gods. On the one hand, it is possible to rationalize some of his generic references
to them as not necessarily reflecting faith but rather a broad form of piety, as, for
instance, when he wrote: “To the gods I am indebted for having good
grandfathers, good parents, a good sister, good teachers, good associates, good
kinsmen and friends, nearly everything good.” On the other hand, however, he
was pretty explicit in other places: “Since it is possible that you might depart
from life this very moment, regulate every act and thought accordingly. But to go
away from among men, if there are gods, is not a thing to be afraid of, for the
gods will not involve you in evil; but if indeed they do not exist, or if they have
no concern about human affairs, why would I wish to live in a universe devoid
of gods or devoid of Providence? But in truth they do exist, and they do care for
human things, and they have put all the means in man’s power to enable him not
to fall into real evils.”
Then again, Marcus very explicitly says a surprisingly high number of times
in the Meditations that it doesn’t matter whether the universe is governed by a
providential divinity (in whatever form) or by random chaos (as the Epicureans
thought), thus showing himself to be less certain in questions of metaphysics
than Epictetus. Here is a taste of what I mean: “You have embarked, made the
voyage, and come to shore; get out. If indeed to another life, there is no want of
gods, not even there. But if to a state without sensation, you will cease to be held
by pains and pleasures.” Or consider this: “Either there is a fatal necessity and
invincible order, or a kind Providence, or a confusion without a purpose and
without a director. If then there is an invincible necessity, why do you resist? But

if there is a Providence that allows itself to be propitiated, make yourself worthy
of the help of the divinity. But if there is a confusion without a governor, be
content that in such a tempest you have yourself a certain ruling intelligence.” It
hardly gets more ecumenical than this!
Considering our discussion so far, you may have been wondering why—
given Epictetus’s insistent talk about God, contrasting so sharply with my own
skepticism—I have chosen him as a companion for this voyage of exploration of
Stoicism. Indeed, you might reasonably ask why someone who is nonreligious is
interested in Stoicism at all, given what can charitably be described as the
ambiguity of Stoics toward the divine. The answer goes to the heart of what I
think makes Stoicism such an attractive philosophy for the twenty-first century.
I used to be a brash atheist, even before New Atheism was a thing. When I
was living in Tennessee, secure in my conviction that creationists were little
more than country bumpkins waiting to be enlightened by the worldly professor
from Rome, I debated scores of people who believed the earth to be only a few
thousand years old. But I was seriously mistaken. Not about the age of the earth
—on that count, I’m pretty confident of my science trumping their religious
doctrine—but rather on the point of the whole exercise. The first time this struck
me was after a debate with Duane Gish, then the vice president of the Institute
for Creation Research (which, to be clear, does no such thing). I remember
feeling quite smug after having scored, or so I thought, a couple of really good
rhetorical blows against Gish that evening. But after the debate I was approached
by a number of people from his side who behaved very politely toward me and
said: “You know, I still don’t believe you are right and the Bible wrong, but I
appreciated tonight that you were nice and correct while debating Dr. Gish.” I
hadn’t made an impression on these folks by way of my astute science-based
arguments, but simply by showing up and behaving like a decent human being
rather than the prick they expected.
That point has been reiterated for me countless times now over the course of
several encounters with a number of believers, both Christians and those of other
persuasions. Moreover, I have learned that most of the time there is precious
little difference between my actual conduct and their own in the business of
everyday life. And if we are talking about mainstream religionists, as opposed to
fundamentalists, our opinions on most crucial matters of ethics and politics are
rarely that different—despite the fact that mine are allegedly informed by my
atheism and theirs by their faith. To put it in philosophical terms, it appears that
much of our diverging metaphysics makes little difference to what we think is

important in life, or to how we behave toward others. If that is the case, why
would I want to walk away from my believing interlocutors and join the New
Atheists over at their tent, where they are as exclusive in whom they welcome as
various groups of religious fundamentalists are about whom they admit to
church?
And what does this have to do with Stoicism? One of the things that attracted
me to it from the get-go is precisely what others may consider one of its
weaknesses: given the Stoic ambiguity over how to interpret the Logos, Stoics
can build a very large tent indeed, welcoming everyone from atheists to
agnostics, from pantheists and panentheists to theists, as long as none of these
guests impose their own metaphysical views on the others. Are you a Christian,
or Muslim, or practicing Jew? Fine, you can treat the Logos as a central attribute
of a personal God who created the universe. Does your metaphysical preference
lean more toward the idea that God is everywhere, to be identified with Nature
itself? Then you will feel at home with many of the original Stoics and their
conception of the rational principle of the universe. Are you instead an agnostic
or atheist? If so, the Logos represents the indisputable fact that the cosmos really
is organized rationally, even though we still do not know how such organization
came about, whether by design or as a result of brute cause and effect. If this
were not the case, then logic, mathematics, and science itself would go out the
window, and you do believe in them, right?
Mind you, this is no counsel for laziness of mind, or for a politically correct
and bland mix of otherwise incompatible positions. It is simply the realization
that what is important in life is to live it well, and that such an objective—the
eudaimonic existence sought by the ancients—depends very little on whether
there is a God or not, and if there is one, on what its specific attributes may or
may not be. Besides, as Cicero wisely put it: “There are many questions in
philosophy to which no satisfactory answer has yet been given. But the question
of the nature of the gods is the darkest and most difficult of all.… So various and
so contradictory are the opinions of the most learned men on this matter as to
persuade one of the truth of the saying that philosophy is the child of ignorance.”
This was true two millennia ago, and despite what you may have heard of late, it
is still true today. So why don’t we agree to disagree on this particular matter,
and get on together with the serious business of living a good life?

PART II
THE DISCIPLINE OF ACTION: HOW TO
BEHAVE IN THE WORLD

CHAPTER 7

IT’S ALL ABOUT CHARACTER (AND VIRTUE)

Of one thing beware, O man: see what is the price at which you sell your
will. If you do nothing else, do not sell your will cheap.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, I.2

THE OTHER NIGHT EPICTETUS RECOUNTED ONE OF HIS FAVORITE anecdotes, one he
regularly uses to make a broader philosophical point. The story concerns
Helvidius Priscus, a Roman statesman (and Stoic philosopher, as it turns out)
who had the unusual stamina—and luck, until it ran out—to live under several
emperors, from Nero to Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and finally Vespasian. According
to our friend and guide, “When Vespasian sent to him not to come into the
Senate he answered, ‘You can forbid me to be a senator; but as long as I am a
senator I must come in.’ ‘Come in then,’ he says, ‘and be silent.’ ‘Question me
not and I will be silent.’ ‘But I am bound to question you.’ ‘And I am bound to
say what seems right to me.’ ‘But, if you say it, I shall kill you.’ ‘When did I tell
you that I was immortal? You will do your part, and I mine. It is yours to kill,
mine to die without quailing: yours to banish, mine to go into exile without
groaning.’ What good, you ask, did Priscus do, being but one? What good does
the purple do to the garment? Just this, that being purple it gives distinction and
stands out as a fine example to the rest.”
Predictably, Vespasian acted on his threat, Priscus was banished from Rome
(for the second time in his life), and soon afterwards he was murdered on the
order of the emperor. The question rhetorically asked by Epictetus, “What good
did Priscus do, being but one?” is as obvious as it is difficult to answer. In the
case of the Roman senator, apparently no good came out of this encounter. He
was an ardent Republican who refused to recognize Vespasian as emperor, but
the Republican cause had by then been lost forever, and Priscus’s death caused
others to suffer: his wife Fannia commissioned Herennius Senecio (who was part

of the Stoic opposition to a later Flavian emperor, Domitian) to write a panegyric
in honor of her slain husband, as a result of which Senecio too was put to death.
And yet Epictetus had a point when he said that these episodes of human
courage and honor “give distinction and stand out as a fine example to the rest.”
That is why we are still in awe of individuals like Helvidius Priscus almost two
millennia after his self-sacrifice.
There are plenty of later and even contemporary stories that could be told by
a modern Epictetus to philosophy students; the names of their protagonists and
the details of what happened would be different, but these stories would provide
equally good examples of how human nature has not changed a bit since Roman
times, for better and for worse. One such example is Malala Yousafzai. Her story
is well known, but it is worth recalling. Malala was eleven years old when she
anonymously began writing a BBC blog detailing the harshly regressive
approach of the Taliban toward women’s education in the Swat Valley region of
Pakistan, where her family ran a chain of schools. Malala was then featured in a
New York Times documentary, which caused both her initial rise to fame and her
targeting by the Taliban. On October 9, 2012, a coward boarded her school bus,
asked for her by name, and shot her three times. Amazingly, Malala survived the
ordeal, eventually making a full recovery.
That experience alone would have been enough to put her on the same level
as Priscus and so many others over the centuries and across cultures who have
dared to stand up to repression and barbarism. But it turns out that the shooting
was just the beginning for Malala. Despite further threats by the Taliban against
her and her father Ziauddin, she has continued to argue publicly and vociferously
on behalf of young girls’ education, and her activism has been credited with
helping to pass Pakistan’s first Right to Education Bill. In 2014, at age
seventeen, she became the youngest person ever to receive a Nobel Prize, for
peace. I am confident that she will keep up the struggle throughout what I hope
will be a long and eudaimonic life. Did Malala make a difference? Yes, both in
practice (in that respect she was luckier than Priscus) and as a role model for
others—“a fine example to the rest” indeed.
But this chapter isn’t about role models (we’ll get there soon, since they do
play a very important part in Stoicism), but rather about the importance of
character and the related concept of virtue. Nowadays both words immediately
conjure up the sharp divide, especially in the United States, between the right
and left sides of the political spectrum. Conservatives tend to talk a lot about
both character and virtue, even when they do not actually practice the latter,

while liberals reflexively treat their valorization as thinly disguised tools of
oppression. Moreover, it is difficult, after two millennia of Christianity, not to
confuse the Christian meaning of “virtue” with the Greco-Roman one that
preceded and inspired it. Nonetheless, making that distinction is important and
will allow us to go back to conceptions of both character and virtue that
supersede political differences, I think, and that both conservatives and liberals
can live with—indeed, should live with if they really care about the values they
claim to care about.
Let’s begin by fleshing out the earlier introduction to the four Stoic cardinal
virtues and their relation to the modern, Christian-inspired versions. We will then
see empirical evidence that these virtues, or at least a very similar set of
desirable character traits—which is what virtues are—have been remarkably
consistent across a number of time periods and cultures. If nothing else, this
reinforces the idea that we are dealing with something truly important for
humanity as a cultured social species.
The Stoics derived their understanding of virtue from Socrates, who believed
that all virtues are actually different aspects of the same underlying feature:
wisdom. The reason why wisdom is the “chief good,” according to Socrates, is
rather simple: it is the only human ability that is good under every and all
circumstances. One can easily imagine other desirable things that are only good
under a certain set of circumstances and that can, or even should, be traded off if
the circumstances change. To be sure, being wealthy is better than being poor,
being healthy is better than being sick, and being educated is better than being
ignorant (standard pairs of preferred and dispreferred indifferents). But we also
need to know how to deal with all of them. In other words, we must have
wisdom—the ability to navigate well the diverse, complex, and often
contradictory circumstances of our lives.
The Stoics adopted Socrates’s classification of four aspects of virtue, which
they thought of as four tightly interlinked character traits: (practical) wisdom,
courage, temperance, and justice. Practical wisdom allows us to make decisions
that improve our eudaimonia, the (ethically) good life. Courage can be physical,
but more broadly refers to the moral aspect—for instance, the ability to act well
under challenging circumstances, as Priscus and Malala did. Temperance makes
it possible for us to control our desires and actions so that we don’t yield to
excesses. Justice, for Socrates and the Stoics, refers not to an abstract theory of
how society should be run, but rather to the practice of treating other human
beings with dignity and fairness.

One crucial feature of the Stoic (and Socratic) conception of virtue is that the
different virtues cannot be practiced independently: one cannot be both
intemperate and courageous, in the Stoic-Socratic meaning of the term. Although
it makes perfect sense for us to say that, for instance, an individual has shown
courage in battle and yet regularly drinks to excess or is ill-tempered, for the
Stoics that person would not be virtuous, because virtue is an all-or-nothing
package. I never said Stoic philosophy isn’t demanding.
What did the Christians do with the Socratic package of virtues? They took it
on board wholesale and expanded it. Thomas Aquinas, one of the most
influential Christian theologians of all time, developed the notion of “heavenly
virtues” in his Summa Theologiae, published in 1273. Basically, Aquinas kept
the four Stoic virtues and added three peculiarly Christian ones, originally
proposed by Paul of Tarsus: faith, hope, and charity. Aquinas’s system thus
featured four cardinal virtues and three so-called transcendent ones, and he
organized the resulting seven hierarchically: wisdom was the most important of
the cardinal virtues (as it was for Socrates), but all four are placed below the
transcendental virtues, among which charity sits on top.
Other cultures have developed, more or less independently, their own sets of
virtues as socially important character traits, each arriving at its own
classification of the relations among virtues. Interestingly, though, there is much
more convergence than we would expect in these days when cultural relativism
is so often portrayed as the norm. A study by Katherine Dahlsgaard, Christopher
Peterson, and Martin Seligman looked at how virtue is articulated in Buddhism,
Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Judaism, Taoism, and what they call
“Athenian philosophy” (mostly Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle). They found a
rather surprising amount of congruence among all of these religiousphilosophical traditions and identified a set of six “core” virtues:
Courage: Emotional strengths that involve the exercise of will to accomplish
goals in the face of opposition, external or internal; examples include
bravery, perseverance, and authenticity (honesty).
Justice: Civic strengths that underlie healthy community life; examples include
fairness, leadership, and citizenship or teamwork.
Humanity: Interpersonal strengths that involve “tending and befriending” others;
examples include love and kindness.
Temperance: Strengths that protect against excess; examples include
forgiveness, humility, prudence, and self-control.

Wisdom: Cognitive strengths that entail the acquisition and use of knowledge;
examples include creativity, curiosity, judgment, and perspective (providing
counsel to others).
Transcendence: Strengths that forge connections to the larger universe and
thereby provide meaning; examples include gratitude, hope, and spirituality.
Four of the six are indistinguishable from the Stoic virtues. Stoics also
accepted the importance of “humanity” and “transcendence,” although they
didn’t think of these as virtues, but rather as attitudes toward others (humanity)
and toward the universe at large (transcendence). The Stoic version of humanity
is embedded in their concept of oikeiôsis and Hierocles’s contracting circles of
concern, which are at the center of the Cynic-Stoic concept of cosmopolitanism:
the idea that we ought to extend the sympathy we have for kin to our friends,
acquaintances, fellow countrymen, and beyond to humanity at large (and even,
some Stoics hinted, to the suffering of sentient animals).
As for transcendence, the Stoic Logos entails a sense of perspective about our
relationship with the cosmos and our place in it. Here is one of my favorite
examples, a meditation that Marcus Aurelius reminded himself to engage in
regularly: “The Pythagoreans bid us in the morning look to the heavens that we
may be reminded of those bodies that continually do the same things and in the
same manner perform their work, and also be reminded of their purity and
nudity. For there is no veil over a star.” I love the poetry of that last sentence,
and I have been doing the early morning meditation from different parts of the
world during my travels, always finding it a soothing experience and a salutary
reminder of the large universe that we inhabit and often neglect to think of while
we go about our busy daily lives.
Returning to the virtues, the broader point here is not that Stoicism somehow
got it right while other traditions did not, but rather that human societies that
have developed philosophies of life have repeatedly come up with remarkably
similar lists of what we call virtues. I do not want to speculate on whether such
convergence is rooted in the earlier biological evolution of humanity, though it is
clear from studies in comparative primatology that we share with other species
of primates a number of prosocial behaviors that we tend to call “moral.”
Dahlsgaard and her colleagues also point out in passing that results similar to
their own have emerged from the few existing studies of virtues in nonliterate
societies—for instance, the Inughuit of northern Greenland and the Maasai of
western Kenya. Whether it is biology, culture, or, more likely, a combination of

both, the fact is that very disparate human societies, rooted in very distinct
religious-philosophical traditions, all seem to value the same core group of
character traits in their members, and these are the very same traits and attitudes
that Stoics have been teaching about for more than two millennia.
I mentioned earlier that how one reacts to the word “character” these days
has become a quick litmus test for whether one’s outlook is politically
conservative or liberal, with conservatives insisting that we should go back to
emphasizing character in schools, families, and the country at large, and liberals
rejecting such talk as a not-so-subtle attempt to maintain white male privilege,
patriarchy, and the like. This, I think, is highly unfortunate. Given evidence of
the universality of valuing character across human cultures, there is no reason
why the concept should have become associated with just one side of the
political spectrum in contemporary Western discourse. Epictetus and other
ancients saw character as both evolving throughout human psychological
development and fundamental to our personal identity: “‘Lay aside the senator’s
dress, and put on rags and appear in that character.’ Very well: is it not given me
still to display a noble voice? In what part then do you appear now?” Epictetus is
reminding us that whatever we don in the course of the day, the toga of a senator,
the suit of someone working on Wall Street, or the stereotypical tweed jacket
with elbow patches of a university professor, the true value of a person lies in
their core, and that core—our character—remains regardless of the role we
happen to play in society, whether by choice, happenstance, or necessity.
That is why it is crucial to social life not only to work to improve your own
character but to be able to assess the character of other people. There is a good
story in this regard concerning Diogenes the Cynic. One day (presumably before
he turned full-time philosopher, when he was still a banker, of all things), he was
asked for a letter of introduction. He told his interlocutor: “You are a man, and
that his eyes will tell him; but whether you are good or bad he will discover, if he
has skill to distinguish the good from the bad; and if he has not that skill, he will
never discover it, though I should write him ten thousand letters.” Epictetus
further clarified this point for my benefit: “A drachma might just as well ask to
be introduced to someone in order to be tested. If the man is a judge of silver,
you will introduce yourself. We ought, therefore, to have some faculty to guide
us in life, as the assayer has in dealing with silver, that I may be able to say as he
does, ‘Give me any drachma you please, and I will distinguish.’” In other words,
your character is your best calling card, and if you interact with good judges of
character, that’s all you’ll need.

I thought of this while watching the 2016 presidential primaries unfolding in
the United States, which happened to take place at about the same time as the
local elections in Italy, including that for mayor of Rome. The similarities
between the two countries’ elections were both striking and disheartening. What
seemed pretty obvious to me was that Diogenes would have found most (though
not necessarily all) of the major candidates—across the political spectrum and in
both countries—obviously deficient in character. Okay, maybe the standards of
the Cynics were impossibly high for most human beings, but still, the gulf
between the lofty ideal and the stark reality looked to me like a wide chasm, and
one far too ample for comfort considering that some of these people were
actually going to win the elections, and one of them was going to become the
president of the most powerful nation on earth.
To be fair, it is not easy to judge someone’s character if we have not met him
personally and have no history of repeated interactions. But when it comes to
highly visible public figures, modern media allow us to glean important clues
from what they say, how they say it, and especially how they act. By those
standards, I detected little in the way of courage or temperance, mostly vague
gestures toward justice, and remarkably little practical wisdom—arguably the
most important of the virtues—among these candidates.
Character takes on a predictable role in politics, with conservatives
emphasizing the character of their candidates at the expense of specific
programmatic platforms, while liberals do the exact reverse. But in politics as in
everyday life, there is no sharp separation between the two: I certainly want to
know the general ideas of a given presidential candidate, or mayoral candidate,
about crucial issues that he is likely to face should he win the election. What is
his take on climate change, foreign affairs, political and economic inequality,
individual rights, and so forth? But it is also obvious that once in office he will
have to deal with whatever complex political, economic, and social landscape
Fate thrusts upon him, and navigating that landscape successfully will require
more than some general ideas of where to go, as theoretically sound as they may
be. Indeed, what will be needed are exactly the fundamental virtues: the courage
to do the right thing under difficult circumstances, the temperance to rein in
excesses, a sense of justice in considering how people are going to be affected by
his decisions, and of course the practical wisdom that will allow him to negotiate
treacherous and always-changing waters.
Epictetus used an apt seafaring metaphor to make a related point:

For the helmsman to wreck his vessel, he does not need the same
resources, as he needs to save it: if he turn it but a little too far to the
wind, he is lost; yes, and if he do it not deliberately but from mere want of
attention, he is lost all the same. It is very much the same in life: if you
doze but a little, all that you have amassed up till now leaves you. Keep
awake then and watch your impressions: it is no trifle you have in
keeping, but self-respect, honor, constancy, a quiet mind, untouched by
distress, or fear, or agitation—in a word, freedom. What are you going to
sell all this for? Look and see what your purchase is worth.
Both public figures and every single one of us need to cultivate virtue and
character, but we also need to remain vigilant in order not to derail the ship we
command, be it an entire country or our own private lives, as even an apparently
inconsequential, momentary distraction can be disastrous. And above all, we
need to be cognizant of what our integrity is worth: if we decide to sell it, it
shouldn’t be for cheap. It is hard to read those words and not think about
political scandals and corruption, but perhaps the cleanup should start closer to
home, with our own behavior, our own too-often-unacknowledged propensity to
compromise principles for the sake of convenience, our lack of courage when it
is called for, our mostly theoretical sense of justice, our often flaunted
temperance, and our own manifestly very limited wisdom in managing whatever
life happens to throw at us.

CHAPTER 8

A VERY CRUCIAL WORD

For if one shows this, a man will retire from his error of himself; but as
long as you do not succeed in showing this, you need not wonder if he
persists in his error, for he acts because he has an impression that he is
right.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, II.26

NOT SO LONG AGO I WENT DOWN TO THE GHIONE, ONE OF the many small theaters
scattered throughout the quarters of old Rome. The show was a production of
Medea, the classic tragedy by Euripides, first performed in Athens at the
Dionysia festival in 431 BCE. Back then, the premiere didn’t go well, and
Euripides placed last in that year’s competition. But he certainly had the last
laugh. Unlike his rival Euphorion’s work, which won then but has since been
largely forgotten, Medea has been the most frequently staged Greek tragedy
throughout the last century.
The night I went, the wonderful Italian actress Barbara De Rossi was playing
the title role. Playing Medea is a very difficult undertaking because the actress
needs to somehow evoke a feeling of sympathy for a character who, after all,
kills her own children in revenge against her husband Jason (he of the
Argonauts), who has just left her for a local princess. By the end of the play, the
chorus is so shocked (and certainly so was the original public in Athens) that it
simply cannot make sense of what has just unfolded onstage:
Manifold are thy shapings, Providence!
Many a hopeless matter gods arrange.
What we expected never came to pass,
What we did not expect the gods brought to bear;
So have things gone, this whole experience through!

De Rossi pulled it off very nicely, but of course a lot of the credit goes to
Euripides’s brilliant study in the strong, intertwined human emotions of love and
hatred. You see, Medea had previously helped Jason steal the fabled Golden
Fleece from her native land, in the process betraying her father and killing her
brother. She did it for love and also to escape her “barbarian” country and come
to civilized Greece (remember, the play was written by a Greek). One of the
intriguing characteristics of the piece is that it can be (and has been) read either
as a tale of misogyny and xenophobia (Medea is a woman and a barbarian) or as
a proto-feminist story of a woman’s struggle in a patriarchal society.
The violent passions of Medea may seem to be very much at odds with the
alleged detachment advocated by the Stoics. Nevertheless, Epictetus relies on the
story to make some crucial points about human nature and the practice of
philosophy. It will take us a little bit to get back to Medea, so hang on tight.
As it happens, Epictetus encountered the same problem that I run up against
with my own students: they really want to study philosophy, but their parents tell
them that it isn’t practical, it’s a waste of time, and the like. Epictetus said: “This
is the defense that we must plead with parents who are angered at their children
studying philosophy: ‘Suppose I am in error, my father, and ignorant of what is
fitting and proper for me. If, then, this cannot be taught or learnt, why do you
reproach me? If it can be taught, teach me, and, if you cannot, let me learn from
those who say that they know. For what think you? That I fall into evil and fail to
do well because I wish to?’” I pointed out to him that such talk is well and good,
but it doesn’t really get to the heart of the matter, which is not just to claim that
learning philosophy will make you a better person, but to convincingly show that
it does.
So Epictetus continued: “What is the reason that we assent to a thing?
Because it seems to us that it is so. It is impossible that we shall assent to that
which seems not to be. Why? Because this is the nature of the mind—to agree to
what is true, and disagree with what is false, and withhold judgment on what is
doubtful.” Maybe, I replied, but an actual example would be more convincing to
me, and especially to my students’ parents. “Feel now, if you can, that it is night.
It is impossible. Put away the feeling that it is day. It is impossible.… When a
man assents, then, to what is false, know that he had no wish to assent to the
false: ‘for no soul is robbed of the truth with its own consent,’ as Plato says, but
the false seemed to him true.” Well, that’s intriguing, isn’t it? The point is that
nobody errs on purpose. Whatever we do, we think it is the right thing to do,
according to whatever criterion we have developed or adopted to establish right

action.
Much more recently, the philosopher Hannah Arendt made a similar point
with her controversial idea of the “banality of evil.” Arendt was sent by The New
Yorker to cover the trial of Adolf Eichmann, an SS-Obersturmbannführer
(lieutenant colonel) who had been one of the high-ranking Nazi officers in
charge of the logistics of Hitler’s so-called Final Solution for the Jewish people.
Arendt wrote a series of highly controversial articles for the magazine about the
trial, and these were eventually collected and published in her landmark book
Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil.
Part of the controversy hinged on the idea Arendt developed that “evil” is
often the result of lack of thought, meaning that people usually don’t want to do
evil, and certainly don’t think of themselves as evildoers. But they also tend to
follow the general opinion without critical analysis, and indeed—as in
Eichmann’s case—they are often convinced that they are doing a good job. The
Obersturmbannführer was proud of the efficiency with which he worked, never
mind that the work resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of innocents
in Hungary, where his activities took place.
I found a tape of the last interview given by Arendt, who further clarified her
thinking about the banality of evil (some alternative translations of key German
words are in brackets):
During the war, Ernst Jünger came across some peasants, and a farmer
had taken in Russian prisoners of war straight from the camps, and
naturally they were completely starving—you know how Russian
prisoners of war were treated here. And [the farmer] says to Jünger, “Well,
they’re subhuman, just like cattle—look how they devour food like
cattle.” Jünger comments on this story, “It’s sometimes as if the German
people were being possessed by the Devil.” And he didn’t mean anything
“demonic” by that. You see, there’s something outrageously stupid [dumm
= ignorant, unwise] about this story. I mean the story is stupid, so to
speak. The man doesn’t see that this is just what starving people do, right?
And anyone would behave like that. But there’s something really
outrageous [empörend = shocking, revolting] about this stupidity.…
Eichmann was perfectly intelligent, but in this respect he had this sort of
stupidity [Dummheit = irrationality, senselessness]. It was this stupidity
that was so outrageous. And that was what I actually meant by banality.
There’s nothing deep about it [the ignorance]—nothing demonic! There’s

simply the reluctance ever to imagine what the other person is
experiencing, correct?
What both Arendt and Epictetus are getting at is a crucial Stoic concept, one
that originally derives from Socrates: people don’t do “evil” on purpose, they do
it out of “ignorance.” Whenever I say this, someone is guaranteed to get
outraged. What? Do I seriously mean to say that Hitler wasn’t evil? How could I
possibly be so naive? Or perhaps I harbor questionable sympathies? But as with
many terms in philosophy, “evil” and “ignorance” don’t mean quite what we
expect.
The term “evil” simply seems to invoke an unnecessary metaphysical
category. If what we are doing is simply labeling a particularly nasty type of bad
behavior, then there is little problem. But not infrequently, when we talk of evil,
we slide into a fallacy known as “reification” (literally, making a thing), which
means speaking of a concept as if it has some kind of mind-independent
existence, as if it is in some sense “out there.” Take the phrase “evil personified,”
as in “Hitler was evil personified,” meaning the embodiment, the physical
incarnation, of evil. But “evil” isn’t a thing characterized by independent
existence. It has no metaphysical consistency: it is simply a shorthand for the
really, really bad stuff that people do, or for the really, really bad character that
leads people to do said stuff. So, in an important philosophical sense, “evil”
doesn’t exist (but the really, really bad stuff does!).
Now let us tackle the more difficult concept—the idea that people do evil (in
this nonmetaphysical sense) out of “ignorance.” In the Euthydemus dialogue,
Plato has Socrates say, “Wisdom alone, is the good for man, ignorance the only
evil,” a phrase that has been misunderstood ever since. The word used by Plato
is amathia, which, to be precise, does not mean “ignorance,” as it turns out. The
philosopher Sherwood Belangia has written extensively on this topic, and it is
well worth considering his explanation of it.
Belangia begins with a conversation (from Plato’s dialogue Alcibiades
Major) between Socrates and his friend Alcibiades, an Athenian general and
politician with, shall we say, a more than checkered record, from an ethical point
of view:
SOCRATES: But if you are bewildered, is it not clear from what has gone
before that you are not only ignorant of the greatest things,

but while not knowing them you think that you do?
ALCIBIADES: I am afraid so.
SOCRATES: Alack then, Alcibiades, for the plight you are in! I shrink
indeed from giving it a name, but still, as we are alone, let me
speak out. You are wedded to stupidity, my fine friend, of the
vilest kind; you are impeached of this by your own words,
out of your own mouth; and this, it seems, is why you dash
into politics before you have been educated. And you are not
alone in this plight, but you share it with most of those who
manage our city’s affairs, except just a few, and perhaps your
guardian, Pericles.
The two Greek words for “ignorance” and “stupidity” are, respectively,
agnoia and amathia. Among Athenians, Alcibiades was one of the most
educated—in the normal sense of the word—and he was obviously intelligent,
again in the normal sense. So neither of the English words “ignorance” nor
“stupidity” really describe what Socrates is getting at. Instead, Alcibiades is
unwise: he “dashes into politics” without the proper “education,” meaning
without the sort of wisdom that comes from being virtuous. The contrast that
Socrates makes between his friend and Pericles is particularly illuminating:
Pericles was an Athenian orator famous for being not just educated and smart,
but also wise. That is what made him a good politician, and that is what—
tragically, as it turns out—was missing in Alcibiades. Amathia, then, can best be
thought of as lack of wisdom—the opposite of sophia, the word that gives root
to “philosophy.”
Belangia helpfully adds: “A-gnoia means literally ‘not-knowing’; a-mathia
means literally ‘not-learning.’ In addition to the type of amathia that is an
inability to learn, there is another form that is an unwillingness to learn.…
Robert Musil in an essay called On Stupidity, distinguished between two forms
of stupidity, one he called ‘an honorable kind’ due to a lack of natural ability and
another, much more sinister kind, that he called ‘intelligent stupidity.’”
Belangia also quotes philosopher Glenn Hughes, who provided a further
elucidation of the concept of amathia and connected it to Nazi Germany. To
Hughes, “intelligent stupidity” was not “so much lack of intelligence as failure
of intelligence, for the reason that it presumes to accomplishments to which it
has no right.” Intelligent stupidity “is no mental illness, yet it is most lethal; a

dangerous disease of the mind that endangers life itself.” The danger lies “not in
an inability to understand but in a refusal to understand, [and] any healing or
reversal of it will not occur through rational argumentation, through a greater
accumulation of data and knowledge, or through experiencing new and different
feelings.” Instead, intelligent stupidity is a “spiritual sickness,” and in need of a
spiritual cure.
So amathia seems to be a crucial word missing from the English vocabulary.
It is the opposite of wisdom, a kind of dis-knowledge of how to deal with other
human beings, and it results in awful actions undertaken by otherwise perfectly
functional, intelligent human beings. Moreover, people characterized by amathia
cannot simply be persuaded by reasoned argument, because they understand the
argument but are crucially deficient in their character, which, as the Stoics have
shown us, is developed over time by a combination of instincts, environmental
influences (especially family guidance), and reason. If something goes wrong
early on in a person’s development, it is difficult for reason alone to rectify the
resulting amathia later in life.
Which finally brings us back to Medea. Epictetus reminded me of what
Euripides has Medea say:
I know full well what ills I mean to do
But passion overpowers what counsel bids me.
Epictetus added: “Here the very gratification of passion and the vengeance
she takes on her husband she believes to be more to her profit than saving her
children.” Yes, I replied, but she is obviously deceived. “Why then are you
indignant with her, because, unhappy woman, she is deluded on the greatest
matters and is transformed from a human being into a serpent? Why do you not
rather pity her—if so it may be? As we pity the blind and the lame, so should we
pity those who are blinded and lamed in their most sovereign faculties. The man
who remembers this, I say, will be angry with no one, indignant with no one,
revile none, blame none, hate none, offend none.”
This is a stunning and profound insight into the human condition. It also
shows a degree of compassion that popular lore associates far more with, say,
Christianity than with Stoicism. And yet this is Epictetus, the slave-turnedteacher, who is speaking. Medea knew it was wrong to make her children suffer
to punish Jason, but emotion (vengeance), not reason, drove her to act as she did.
Epictetus advises pity, not indignation or anger, as our proper attitude toward

Medea because she is not “evil,” whatever that may mean, but a person lacking
something important, like a lame person (the same word Epictetus uses to
describe his own condition). Specifically, Medea lacks wisdom and is affected
by amathia, the sort of dis-knowledge that brings ordinary people to make
unreasonable judgments about certain situations that then lead them to what
outsiders correctly perceive as horrible acts. If we internalize this Stoic attitude
—or its equivalent in Buddhism or Christianity—we indeed will be angry or
indignant with no one; there will be no one we revile, blame, hate, or are
offended by. I submit that the resulting world would be significantly better than
the one we currently live in.
Epictetus elaborated on why he thought people like Medea are such tragic
figures:
Every error implies conflict; for since he who errs does not wish to go
wrong but to go right, plainly he is not doing what he wishes. For what
does the thief wish to do? What is to his interest. If then thieving is
against his interest, he is not doing what he wishes. But every rational
soul by nature dislikes conflict; and so, as long as a man does not
understand that he is in conflict, there is nothing to prevent him from
doing conflicting acts, but, whenever he understands, strong necessity
makes him abandon the conflict and avoid it.
That is, Medea did not wish to err, but was simply convinced that she was
doing the right thing. The same, I’m sure Epictetus would argue, was true for
Eichmann, despite the vast differences between him and Medea in
circumstances, apparent reasons for acting, and ultimate outcomes.
Modern psychologists have discovered a pertinent phenomenon known as
cognitive dissonance, a condition first described by the psychologist Leon
Festinger. Cognitive dissonance is a very uncomfortable psychological state that
occurs when someone becomes aware of the conflict between two judgments
that he holds to be equally true. People do not want to experience cognitive
dissonance, just as Epictetus said that people do not want to knowingly be in
error. Thus, they reduce dissonance by endorsing any explanation that deploys
what they think are good reasons leading to sound judgments, even though to
others those reasons and judgments appear to be obvious and even absurd
rationalizations. Aesop described this delightfully in his famous fable about the

fox and the grapes, back in the sixth century BCE.
The uncomfortable truth is, again, that people suffering from cognitive
dissonance are neither stupid nor ignorant. I have encountered plenty of smart
and well-educated individuals who nonetheless reject Darwin’s theory of
evolution, one of the most firmly established scientific theories ever. They have
to reject it, because it seems to them to be in irreconcilable conflict with the
Bible, the reference point for their whole lives as devout Christians. If we arrive
at the judgment that either Darwin is right or the word of God is true, then it is
perfectly natural—rational even—for some of us to choose God over Darwin.
Epictetus would not have been surprised, and neither should I have been when I
met fundamentalist creationists face to face for the first time. But I was much
younger (and somewhat less wise?) then. As the writer Michael Shermer has
observed, the more clever people are, the better they are at rationalizing away
the sources of their cognitive dissonance. Conspiracy theorists, for instance, are
often brilliant at explaining what others perceive as gaping holes in their theories
of how the world really works.
What’s to be done then? Once more, psychological research may be helpful
here. We know that the best way to help students change their conceptual
outlook about scientific notions is to purposefully increase their cognitive
dissonance until they feel so uncomfortable that they themselves seek out more
information and new sources to resolve the conflict. This, of course, is not
always possible—I doubt that it would have worked with Medea or Eichmann—
but the notion provides us with a good understanding of both what is going on
and what, if anything, can be done about it.
Still, I worry about the same sort of thing that critics of Hannah Arendt
worried about: isn’t the idea of evil being banal, of amathia, dangerously close
to an excuse for horrific behavior? Doesn’t it, at the very least, encourage us to
respond passively to “evil”? Naturally, Epictetus had pondered this as well:
“‘Such a one reviled you.’ Many thanks to him for not striking. ‘But he did
strike too.’ Many thanks to him for not wounding. ‘But he did wound.’ Many
thanks to him for not killing. For when, or in whose school, did he learn ‘that
man is a gentle and sociable creature and that wrongdoing in itself does great
harm to the wrongdoer’? If, then, he has not learnt this or been convinced of it,
why should he not follow what appears to be his interest?”
If this doesn’t sound to you like “turn the other cheek,” I don’t know what
does. But Epictetus didn’t stop at counseling endurance and patience, although
he certainly did that too: he actually diagnosed what is going amiss. The

wrongdoer does not understand that he is doing harm to himself first and
foremost, because he suffers from amathia, lack of knowledge of what is truly
good for himself. And what is good for him is the same thing that is good for all
human beings, according to the Stoics: applying reason to improve social living.
As far as the rest of us are concerned, remembering that people do bad things
out of lack of wisdom is not only a reminder to be compassionate toward others,
it also constantly tells us just how important it is to develop wisdom.

CHAPTER 9

THE ROLE OF ROLE MODELS

What would Heracles have been if he had said, “How am I to prevent a
big lion from appearing, or a big boar, or brutal men?” What care you, I
say? If a big boar appears, you will have a greater struggle to engage in; if
evil men appear, you will free the world from evil men.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, IV.10

ON OCTOBER 13, 1992, I WAS WATCHING THE VICE PRESIDENTIAL debate of the
American electoral season. I had moved to the United States from Rome a
couple of years earlier, and the whole idea of televised debates as “infotainment”
was very new to me. There were three men onstage: Al Gore and Dan Quayle,
two career politicians, and an awkward guy named James Stockdale. It was not a
good night for Stockdale, who began the debate with the amusing statement,
“Who am I? Why am I here?” People initially took his remarks as endearingly
self-deprecating, but then he quickly showed that he really had very little clue as
to what he was doing there. He seemed foolish, but little did I know that
Stockdale would become one of my role models, several decades after that night
and about ten years after his death. Stockdale, you see, was a modern Stoic, and
one whose story is well worth telling.
To do so, we have to go back to September 9, 1965. American involvement in
the Vietnam War had started in earnest the year before, after the bizarre
“incident” of the Tonkin Gulf: American warships fired at nothing in the middle
of the night, and President Lyndon Johnson used that as the official excuse to
begin “retaliatory” bombing raids on North Vietnam. Hearing the news,
Stockdale, who was commander of Fighter Squadron 51 of the US Navy and
who had actually been at Tonkin, commented, “Retaliation for what?” He was
ordered to keep silent.
On September 9, Stockdale was flying over North Vietnam when he was shot

down and captured. He would spend seven and a half years in the so-called
Hanoi Hilton, enduring an ordeal that included beatings and torture, as well as
being regularly locked up in leg irons and confined to a three-by-nine-foot cell
without windows. Despite these incredibly trying circumstances, Stockdale
managed to organize his fellow prisoners, creating and enforcing a code of
conduct to regulate their behavior. Moreover, in order not to be used for
propaganda by the North Vietnamese, he first slit his scalp with a razor, to
disfigure himself, and when that didn’t work he proceeded to bash his face with
a stool to make it swollen and himself useless to the enemy. At one point he even
slit his wrists to avoid being tortured and revealing the underground activities of
his comrades. Eventually Stockdale was released and came back to the United
States, in horrible physical condition. He began to recover, however, and in 1976
he was awarded the Medal of Honor, the highest military recognition, given for
acts of valor above and beyond the call of duty.
When he was asked in an interview who didn’t make it out of the Hanoi
Hilton, Stockdale replied:
Oh, that’s easy, the optimists. Oh, they were the ones who said, “We’re
going to be out by Christmas.” And Christmas would come, and
Christmas would go. Then they’d say, “We’re going to be out by Easter.”
And Easter would come, and Easter would go. And then Thanksgiving,
and then it would be Christmas again. And they died of a broken heart.…
This is a very important lesson. You must never confuse faith that you will
prevail in the end—which you can never afford to lose—with the
discipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality,
whatever they might be.
The interviewer referred to this as the Stockdale Paradox, but he might as
well have attributed it to the original source: Epictetus. Stockdale, back in 1959,
had been sent by the Navy to study at Stanford University in pursuit of a
master’s degree in international relations and—of all things—comparative
Marxist thought. Finding himself rather bored with his regular studies, he
wandered into the Philosophy Department. There he met Prof. Phil Rhinelander,
who changed Stockdale’s life profoundly. The Navy student enrolled in
Rhinelander’s two-term course, “The Problems of Good and Evil,” midway
through the first term. To make up for the delay, the professor offered Stockdale
one-on-one tutoring in his office, to catch up with the other students. In their last

session, Rhinelander picked up a copy of Epictetus’s Handbook and gave it to
Stockdale, saying: “As a military man, I think you’ll have special interest in this.
Frederick the Great never went on a campaign without a copy of this handbook
in his kit.” Stockdale eventually read both the Handbook and the Discourses
many times, and he later credited Epictetus with saving his life in Vietnam by
giving him the moral strength to overcome his ordeal, as well as the rational
lucidity to see what could and could not be done about it. It was a terrible
application of the Stoic dichotomy of control. In 1981 Stockdale became a
fellow of the Hoover Institution, based at Stanford, and for twelve years there he
wrote and lectured extensively about Stoicism.
Nothing of what you are about to read should be construed as either a defense
of the American intervention in Vietnam (which Stockdale knew was based on a
lie) or an attempt to demonize the North Vietnamese. It is only a personal human
story that we all ought to reflect on. Stockdale understood an important truth
about war that applies to life in general: holding the moral high ground and
maintaining self-respect is more important than the facts on the ground, be they
the weaponry on each side (in the case of war) or the circumstances of our
ordinary lives. Doing so involves a mind game, however, and that is why
Stoicism is so useful: it is a major mind game centered on keeping one’s moral
high ground and self-respect.
The first real test for Stockdale came when he was shot down on that
September 9. As he put it: “After ejection I had about 30 seconds to make my
last statement in freedom before I landed on the main street of that little village
right ahead. And so help me, I whispered to myself: ‘Five years down there at
the least. I’m leaving the world of technology and entering the world of
Epictetus.’”
As soon as he landed and was captured, Stockdale understood all too well
Epictetus’s dichotomy of control, specifically concerning his own stature in life.
In a matter of minutes, he went from being an admired officer, commanding 100
pilots and over 1,000 men, to “taking the ropes” and being vilified as a criminal.
After quickly freeing himself from his parachute, he was surrounded by a dozen
men: “By the time the tackling and pummeling and twisting and wrenching were
over, and it lasted for three or more minutes before the guy in the pith helmet got
there to blow his whistle, I had a very badly broken leg that I felt sure would be
with me for life. And that hunch turned out to be right.” He later recalled that
Epictetus too had been crippled for life after his leg was broken by his first
master, and that Epictetus’s assessment of that fact had been: “Lameness is an

impediment to the leg, but not to the will; and say this to yourself with regard to
everything that happens. For you will find it to be an impediment to something
else, but not truly to yourself.” Stockdale had seven and a half more years to
truly appreciate just how right the Greek philosopher was.
By the time he was brought into the Hanoi Hilton, Stockdale had resolved to
do precisely what Epictetus advised: to play whatever part Fate had allotted to
him to the best of his abilities. He constantly kept in mind that his enemies
would win only if he succumbed to two things: fear and loss of self-respect.
Stockdale studied his captors, and particularly the man who was in charge of
torturing him. As Epictetus and Arendt would both see, had they been there, he
came to understand that the man was not evil, but rather that he was doing his
job with what he perceived as integrity. Perhaps surprisingly, Stockdale
developed not hatred, but respect for him. A torturer’s job is to break the
prisoner’s spirit, to instill fear. Knowing this, Epictetus arrived at the only
possible response: “When a man who has set his will neither on dying nor upon
living at any cost, comes into the presence of the tyrant, what is there to prevent
him from being without fear? Nothing.”
Thanks to having internalized Epictetus’s philosophy, Stockdale was a man
on a mission, even in prison and with a broken leg. He created a secret society of
prisoners to whom, as the highest-ranking officer, he would do his best to issue
sensible orders to resist the enemy. He gave his soldiers practical advice as to
what was and was not permissible to admit under torture. Realizing that the US
government’s official policy of providing the enemy only with name, rank, serial
number, and date of birth would quickly get many of them killed, Stockdale
devised alternative guidelines of his own, which included not bowing in public
and not admitting to any crime—all designed to thwart the attempts of the North
Vietnamese to exploit prisoners for propaganda purposes. Sure enough, the
propaganda footage that was put out backfired, since many soldiers used their
appearances on film to engage in jokes at the expense of their captors. On one
occasion, Nels Tanner, a friend of Stockdale’s, answered a request for the names
of pilots who had turned in their wings to express opposition to the war by
providing two: Lieutenants Clark Kent and Ben Casey. Tanner endured the
consequences of his defiance: three successive days of rope torture followed by
123 days in leg stocks and isolation.
Eventually, the North Vietnamese understood the inner workings of the
resistance within the American group and sent Stockdale and nine others to
solitary confinement for periods ranging from three and a half to more than four

years. Another of Stockdale’s companions, Howie Rutledge, enrolled in a
master’s degree program when he finally made it back home and wrote a thesis
on whether torture or solitary confinement was more likely to break a person’s
spirit. To collect his research data he sent out questionnaires to his comrades and
to others who had been prisoners of war. The results were striking: those who
had spent less than two years in confinement said that torture was the worst;
those who had spent more than two years in isolation said that the latter
experience trumped even torture. That’s because, after going that long without
seeing anyone, a person desperately needs friends, quite regardless of who they
are, their ideologies, or their politics. Stockdale interpreted Rutledge’s finding in
the light of Epictetus’s teachings—that it is shame, not physical pain, that truly
brings down a human being. When he himself emerged from that experience, he
remembered that, asked what was going to be the fruit of all his teachings,
Epictetus replied: “Tranquillity, fearlessness, and freedom.” That certainly came
true for James Stockdale.
One important question is whether it was truly Stoicism that made Stockdale
invulnerable to torture and solitary confinement, or whether Stoicism was simply
an after-the-fact rationalization of feats that resulted from his innate character. A
more philosophical way to put this is: can virtue be taught, or are people born
with whatever virtue they have? Not only did the ancient Greeks debate this
issue in detail, but modern biology and developmental psychology have
uncovered a significant amount of empirical evidence that is very relevant to it.
In Plato’s Meno, Socrates is asked by the character bearing that name: “Can
you tell me, Socrates, is human excellence something teachable? Or, if not
teachable, is it something to be acquired by training? Or, if it cannot be acquired
either by training or by teaching, does it accrue to me at birth or in some other
way?” After a lengthy discussion, Socrates concludes that “excellence” (or
virtue) may be teachable in principle, but as there are no teachers of it to be
found anywhere, in practice it is not. The implication, then, is that people who
have it probably acquire a propensity for it as an endowment at birth. Aristotle,
however, had different ideas. He made a crucial distinction between moral virtue
and intellectual virtue, the former arising from both natural disposition and habit
acquired while growing up and the latter resulting from reflection in a mature
mind. It follows, then, that there are three sources of virtue: some comes from
our natural endowment, some is obtained by habit, especially early in life, and
some can be acquired intellectually and therefore can be taught.
This “mixed” model of the acquisition of virtue happens to work well with

Stoic philosophy and is also favored by modern research in cognitive
psychology. The Stoics, as we have seen, held a developmental model of
morality, thinking that we naturally come equipped with the ability to have
regard not just for ourselves but also for our caretakers and other people with
whom we come into regular contact early on in life. Once the age of reason
arrives, however, when we are about seven or eight years old, we can begin to
further build our virtuous character by two means: habit and (more so later in
life) explicit philosophical reflection.
In modern psychology, perhaps the most famous attempt to summarize how
people develop morally is Lawrence Kohlberg’s theory of six stages of moral
development, which builds on Jean Piaget’s original work, as well as on a
significant amount of modern empirical evidence. The six stages described by
Kohlberg are grouped into three phases: pre-conventional morality (which
begins with a stage regulated by obedience and punishment and then moves to a
stage of self-orientation), conventional morality (from a stage of interpersonal
accord and conformity to one of maintenance of social order and response to
authority), and post-conventional morality (from a stage of response to a
perceived social contract to one of adherence to universal ethical principles).
Kohlberg’s theory has been criticized on a number of levels, including too much
emphasis on rational decision-making and on the ethical concept of justice (as
opposed to, respectively, the role of instinctual judgments and of other ethical
virtues, such as care for others). But it does seem to hold fairly well across
cultures, even though people go through the different stages at different rates,
and distinct cultures emphasize some aspects of the model more than others.
Regardless, we do not have to buy into a specific modern theory of moralpsychological development to agree with the general idea that we get our ethics
from a combination of instincts, training, and—for those so inclined—explicit
critical reflection. This theory is in accord with repeated findings by biologists
who study gene-environment interactions in a variety of living organisms:
complex traits, especially behavioral ones, seem almost always to develop
through a continuous feedback of genes and environments, nature intermingled
with nurture. And of course, for human beings a major aspect of the environment
is our culture and our social interactions with other members of our species.
Which is all we need to get back to Stoicism.
Role models such as James Stockdale, Paconius Agrippinus, Helvidius
Priscus, and Malala Yousafzai highlight the point that Stoicism is a practical
philosophy, not abstract theorizing. While Stoics of course put forth ethical

principles for how to conduct ourselves and live the eudaimonic life, their
emphasis was on how real people behave, not just how they talk. Observing and
imitating role models, then, is one powerful way to work on our own virtue. We
do something like this in modern societies as well, whenever we hold up public
figures as examples to our younger generations. The problem nowadays is that,
by and large, we do a pretty bad job of picking role models. We glorify actors,
singers, athletes, and generic “celebrities,” only to be disappointed when—
predictably—it turns out that their excellence at reciting, singing, playing
basketball, or racking up Facebook likes and Twitter followers has pretty much
nothing to do with their moral fiber.
A similar problem arises with the contemporary, highly inflated use of the
word “hero,” especially in the United States. Some brave people who are willing
to sacrifice themselves for the common good truly deserve that appellative
(though they don’t have to be almost exclusively drawn from the ranks of the
military or the police). But someone who dies, say, as a result of a terrorist attack
is not a hero—he is a victim. He probably did not display courage and otherregard; he just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time. We should
most certainly mourn him, but labeling him a “hero” does not do justice to what
actually happened, and it does a great injustice to actual heroes, confusing
people about the very meaning of the term.
The other thing to remember about role models—and the Stoics understood
this very well—is that they are not perfect human beings, for the simple reason
that there is no such thing. Moreover, making perfection an integral part of our
concept of role model means that we are setting a standard that is impossibly
high. Some religions do this of course. For Christians, the model of universally
good behavior is Jesus, but that’s a tough role model to actually attempt to
emulate, since believers are literally trying to be like gods. Bound to fail, we
have to accept the divinity’s mercy as our path to salvation.
The Stoics, eminently practical and good connoisseurs of human psychology
that they were, approached things differently. Seneca wrote an essay on the
nature of the wise person, the ideal Stoic role model, or Sage. Here is how he
responded to his critics who thought that he was setting the bar too high for
anyone to actually succeed at being wise: “You have no cause for saying, as you
are wont [sic] to do, that this wise man of ours is nowhere to be found; we do not
invent him as an unreal glory of the human race, or conceive a mighty shadow of
an untruth, but we have displayed and will display him just as we sketch him,
though he may perhaps be uncommon, and only one appears at long intervals;

for what is great and transcends the common ordinary type is not often
produced; but this very Marcus Cato himself, the mention of whom started this
discussion, was a man who I fancy even surpassed our model.”
Marcus Cato, known as Cato the Younger, was a Roman senator and a
political opponent of Julius Caesar. Cato was a Roman aristocrat, and as such a
product of his time. He was unable to see, for instance, that the Roman Republic
he so idolized was highly unequal (though not as much as it would become
under the empire he fought to prevent) and founded on slavery and military
conquest. For instance, in 72 BCE, he volunteered to fight against the rebel slave
Spartacus, clearly not having paused to consider that the revolt might have been
a reaction to extreme injustice. Like most Romans, he was probably also not
particularly bothered by the clearly inferior position accorded to women in that
society. In other words, he would spectacularly fail a modern test as a role
model. But that would be exactly the wrong way to look at him, because it
would be an attempt to make him a godlike figure capable of doing what no
human being can do: completely transcend his own upbringing. Instead, we
should assess him by the standards of his own culture and time. By those
standards, he was a role model indeed.
Cato was an unusual kid. At fourteen, he asked his tutor Sarpedon why
nobody acted to stop the illegal actions of the dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla, to
which Sarpedon replied that people feared Sulla more than they hated him. Cato
then said, “Give me a sword, that I might free my country from slavery.”
Sarpedon never again let Cato play unattended when in Rome, just in case. After
he began to study Stoicism, Cato lived very modestly, despite the wealth he
inherited. When he was given a military command in Macedon at age twentyeight, he marched with his men, sharing their food and sleeping quarters. As a
result, he was loved by his legionnaires. Later on, in his political career, Cato
quickly built a reputation for incorruptibility—a very unusual trait at that, or any,
time. As quaestor, he prosecuted Sulla’s informers for illegal appropriation of
treasury funds and for murder. When he was sent to Cyprus, he managed the
public books with absolute integrity (again, a rare thing indeed), raising 7,000
silver talents for the Republic’s treasury. To appreciate the enormity of that sum,
consider that a Roman talent weighed 32.3 kilograms (71 pounds) and that a
single, smaller, Attic talent was sufficient to pay nine man-years of skilled work
—or equivalently, a month’s wages for a trireme ship’s crew of 200.
Eventually, Cato came into open conflict with Julius Caesar, who followed in
the steps of Sulla and declared war against the Roman Senate by crossing the

river Rubicon with one of his legions, the occasion on which he famously
declared, “Alea iacta est” (The die is cast). The rest, as they say, is history:
Caesar’s forces, after an initial setback, defeated the Senate’s army at Pharsalus,
in Greece. Cato refused to concede and retreated to Utica, in modern Tunisia.
Caesar pursued Cato and his allies and won a final decisive battle at Thapsus.
Cato, refusing to be captured alive by his enemy, who would have used him for
political gain, did the Roman thing: he attempted to commit suicide with his
dagger. Plutarch tells us the rest of the story:
Cato did not immediately die of the wound; but struggling, fell off the
bed, and throwing down a little mathematical table that stood by, made
such a noise that the servants, hearing it, cried out. And immediately his
son and all his friends came into the chamber, where, seeing him lie
weltering in his own blood, great part of his bowels out of his body, but
himself still alive and able to look at them, they all stood in horror. The
physician went to him, and would have put in his bowels, which were not
pierced, and sewed up the wound; but Cato, recovering himself, and
understanding the intention, thrust away the physician, plucked out his
own bowels, and tearing open the wound, immediately expired.
Caesar was not pleased, commenting: “Cato, I grudge you your death, as you
would have grudged me the preservation of your life.” You can appreciate why
Seneca thinks of this sort of man as a true Stoic role model.
After all this talk of overcoming the hardships of torture and solitary
confinement, or of disemboweling oneself in order not to concede political
advantage, you might have the impression that Stoicism is not impossible, but it
sure is demanding. As the public philosopher, and my colleague, Nigel
Warburton asked me during an interview, “What about ordinary life, where
people hardly have to face such extreme situations or display such levels of
courage and endurance?”
It’s a good question, but the answer is simple enough: it is by hearing about
great deeds that we not only become inspired by what human beings at their best
can do, but also are implicitly reminded of just how much easier most of our
lives actually are. That being the case, it shouldn’t really take a lot of courage to
stand up to your boss when your coworker is being treated badly, no? I mean, the
worst that can happen is that you’ll be fired, not put into solitary confinement
and tortured. How difficult is it, really, to behave honestly in the course of

everyday life, since we are not risking military defeat and the prospect of suicide
to save our honor? And yet, imagine how much better the world would be if we
all did display just a bit more courage, a slightly more acute sense of justice,
more temperance, and more wisdom each day. The Stoic gamble was that
hearing about people like Cato, Stockdale, and the others we have encountered
here helps us put things into perspective—that is, to become slightly better
human beings than we already are.

CHAPTER 10

DISABILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

Doing without a wheelchair is not a basic life goal.
—LAWRENCE BECKER, VIDEO ADDRESS TO POST-POLIO HEALTH INTERNATIONAL

STOICISM IS MEANT TO AID ACTUAL PEOPLE IN LIVING THEIR lives to the fullest
possible extent. But it is another question whether Stoicism can also be helpful
to those who are forced to live, not simply through challenging circumstances,
but through permanently challenged lives—people who are confined to a
wheelchair, for instance, or battling a debilitating mental illness. The answer
appears to be a qualified yes, at least some of the time. Philosophy is no miracle
cure, and it should not be treated as one.
In this chapter, we will take momentary leave of our friend Epictetus and
meet three modern Stoics who have stories to tell about how their philosophy
helped them cope with the aftermath of polio, with depression, and with autism.
We have seen that the ancients often taught by invoking real and imaginary role
models, from Socrates to the demigod Heracles. The people we will encounter in
this chapter are modern Stoic role models whose thoughts and actions give us
much to reflect upon and be inspired by in our own little and big quotidian
struggles.
Larry Becker, now a retired professor of philosophy who taught at the
College of William and Mary, wrote a fundamental academic book on modern
Stoicism. I initially became aware of Larry because of that book, which
eventually I spent several months discussing with my friend Greg Lopez and a
number of others interested in Stoicism in New York City. Larry’s book is not
easy to read without some background in philosophy, and the style is, shall we
say, unusual. From the beginning, he refers to the Stoics as “us” and “we.” Here
was someone who evidently took the idea of Stoicism as a personal philosophy
very seriously.

It soon turned out that I had no clue as to just how seriously! By chance I
discovered that my friend and colleague Nick Pappas at the City College of New
York, who is an ancient philosophy scholar (meaning a scholar of ancient
philosophy, not that he’s particularly old), is a good friend and former colleague
of Larry’s, and so the two of us were introduced.
Larry has been suffering for decades from the aftermath of polio. Nick had
told me about heroic feats performed by his friend to overcome the effects of his
disability and flourish in his teaching and scholarly career, and this background
had of course already put his book and interest in Stoicism into a whole different
perspective for me. Then Larry made me aware of a video he had done for PostPolio Health International, of which he was president and chair from 2006 to
2009. It was watching that video that made me fully appreciate why Larry
Becker is a modern role model in the best Stoic tradition.
Larry had polio in his teenage years, back in 1952, prior to the vaccine, and
spent a lengthy time in a rehabilitation hospital. Initially he was quadriplegic and
confined to an iron lung. After two and a half years of rehabilitation, he had
regained the use of his legs, but not of his arms. Larry’s breathing was
compromised by polio, a condition that has gotten worse with age. Because he
cannot use his diaphragm, he breathes with his neck muscles; when he goes to
sleep, he stops breathing entirely until his blood CO2 climbs enough to wake him
up. As he wryly put it, “That’s inconvenient.” So he uses a small portable
ventilator for sleeping and for resting during the day. The physical abilities he
recovered in the rehabilitation hospital years ago are gradually disappearing as
he ages, and it is now impossible for him to teach other than in a one-on-one
situation.
In the video, Larry begins by explaining that early on he was able to leave his
wheelchair and walk up and down stairs to get to and from his teaching
classroom. But things began to get worse in the early 1980s, and he started
dreading the idea of going to class or attending faculty meetings (well, all right,
everybody dreads faculty meetings). His initial reaction was to say nothing to
others and to simply avoid having to walk or climb stairs as much as possible.
But he quickly got to the point where he had a hard time dealing with just the
four steps he had to negotiate between his office and the open campus. He was
spending idle time at his desk, worrying about getting outside, and then about
going home in the evening.
His initial analysis was that he was suffering from a phobia, perhaps
accompanied by something like panic attacks. So he went to see a psychiatrist

who specialized in rehabilitation. The psychiatrist himself was totally blind,
which must have made it no cakewalk for him to get through medical school.
The psychiatrist’s office was in a nice old house, with five uneven steps from the
parking lot, four more to the front porch, and no handrails. Not good.
After an initial explanation from Larry, the psychiatrist asked him what was
bothering him right at that moment, to which Larry replied, somewhat testily,
“I’m bothered by how I’m going to get out of your building.” The psychiatrist
calmly picked up his phone, called his secretary, and asked her whether they had
a ramp running around the back of the building, down to the parking lot. She
confirmed that they did. “How do you feel now?” inquired the psychiatrist.
“I feel fine about that,” Larry said.
The doctor then went through a series of potential practical solutions to the
problem: Can you change office? No. Can the university build you a ramp?
Possibly. The doctor told Larry that he had taken subways to get to medical
school, and that as a blind man he was terrified of subway platforms. “It’s a
reasonable fear,” he added, “and you’ll notice that I chose to practice in a city
without subways.” At that point Larry began to feel a bit foolish. The university
did build a ramp for him, and he got a wheelchair with foot controls. That was a
good lesson in practical Stoicism, without the theory.
Larry reflected that these sorts of things had happened to him throughout his
life and, moreover, that they happen to everyone, disabled or not. This reflection
led him to a number of suggestions to help others develop a personal philosophy
about life, whether they live with a disability or not.
Larry’s first point is to realize the importance of agency. It has been crucial
for him to feel like an agent in the world, not a patient. Some big tasks, however,
must be accomplished—for instance, becoming and remaining an agent in the
first place. At the beginning of our lives as helpless infants—“entry-level human
beings” he calls them—we are “patients,” entirely dependent on others. We
slowly learn, from scratch, how to be agents. We become adults, taking charge of
our lives, claiming and earning our agency (all of which is perfectly compatible
with the Stoic doctrine of ethical development, with which we are by now
familiar). For Larry, the most devastating disabilities are precisely those that
severely limit or entirely erase our agency. Yet he claims that even if polio
paralyzes you completely, paralysis itself doesn’t permanently rob you of your
agency. Nevertheless, you may need to reclaim it, slowly and painfully, as he
did. Indeed, he saw the whole question of dealing with his disability as
coinciding with his need to reclaim his agency.

After you have reclaimed your agency, Larry points out, you are in the same
position as everyone else: you have to become good at being an agent. This, he
says, requires lining up the following elements: values, preferences, goals,
deliberations, decisions, and actions. If these are incoherent, incomplete, or
weak, then you are paralyzed no matter what your physical condition happens to
be. You can also be paralyzed by indecision, because you are not committed to a
particular course of action and wish to keep multiple possibilities open. Facing
too many choices on the menu, or too many cars on the dealer’s lot, isn’t a good
thing, as modern cognitive science clearly shows. To complicate things, there is
the fact that the world itself changes, requiring constant adjustments to our goals,
decisions, and actions. In other words, we need to learn how to maintain agency
under changing circumstances. Like airline pilots, we need to keep learning new
skills, but unlike airline pilots, we don’t have the luxury of learning with
simulators. Life only happens once, and we learn “in the air,” not in a safe
environment. To make things even more stressful, we usually have passengers
we care a lot about on board too!
Second, we need to focus on abilities, not disabilities. Larry has learned to
disregard his disability, or at least to regard it as a dispreferred indifferent. This
requires mastering additional tasks, like keeping the focus incessantly on
abilities. The emphasis, for every human being, should be on what we can do,
not on what we cannot do. Instead of saying, “I can’t do that,” say, “I can do it
this way.”
We also need to practice the Socratic task: know thyself. Knowing our
physical and psychological abilities includes knowing our limits. Ignorance, or
worse, self-deception about our own abilities can be very dangerous. We need to
keep an up-to-date, accurate account of what is possible for us. This will depend
not just on our abilities but also on the specific (and variable) physical and social
environments in which we find ourselves at different times. Larry also counsels
us to train ourselves to recognize when we have lost a good fit between our
abilities and our activities. We must develop what he calls an internal alarm
system, which will tell us when it’s time to stop suffering and begin (or resume)
taking charge. Larry knows from experience that knowing oneself is hard, it
takes practice, and it requires some perspective.
Third, we need to develop a life plan. To do this we must take a look at our
entire life, make plans, and arrive at decisions “all things considered,” as
philosophers say. The idea isn’t the naive one of figuring out what we want to do
in life early on and then just implementing the plan, Soviet-style. Rather, Larry

suggests making a habit of reflecting on what is important to us and on the best
way to achieve it, and also to continuously revise our life plan, according to our
changing abilities and circumstances. Our dynamic plan should be coherent,
ambitious, achievable, revisable, and—ideally—compatible with a generally
rising level of life satisfaction. In his own case, Larry admits that, by failing to
keep things in perspective in the late 1980s, he denied the onset of the late
effects of polio; with a better perspective, he would have told himself that maybe
his fear of long staircases was not that unreasonable after all.
Fourth, we should strive for internal harmony, which is a matter of constantly
attempting to harmonize the components of our (dynamic) life plan. We need to
harmonize our spiritual and rational experiences, our desires and our needs, our
reason with our actions. “Personally, I think to have a harmonious life is
preferable to being an interesting subject for a biographer, a journalist, or a
gossiper,” Larry wisely observed.
Lastly, Larry cautions us to beware of brick walls. We need to recognize them
when we hit them; even better is to see them coming before we hit them hard.
The trick here, according to Larry, is to know when to quit: neither a minute too
soon nor a minute too late. Avoiding brick walls requires not only that we keep
learning about our abilities throughout life, but also that we determine that what
looks like a brick wall really is one. “If it is an illusion, then you can go through
it; if it is not, then you need to work around it, or go in another direction
entirely.” The problem, he adds, is that we seem to have trouble figuring out
which brick walls are worth worrying about and which ones we should try to tear
down. The way Larry deals with this problem is by going back to the basics.
First he identifies his fundamental life goals and commitments: to his wife of
forty-six years and to the goals of their life together; to his professional
objectives; and to the creation of a truly physically and socially hospitable
environment for everyone. Only when these commitments are at stake is he
willing to stop if he encounters an actual brick wall, and only if he hits it pretty
hard. Ramps, in Larry’s estimation, don’t qualify: “Doing without a wheelchair
is not a basic life goal.”
It is hard for me to add something meaningful here. I am truly in awe of a
decent human being who is a serious scholar, a committed Stoic, and someone
who has clearly lived his philosophy under very challenging circumstances. I’ll
try to remember Larry the next time I think I’ve hit a brick wall that much more
likely is just an illusion conjured by my self-centered imagination. As Epictetus
famously put it: “Bear and forbear.”

Our second example of a modern Stoic who has used his philosophy to
manage a difficult situation is Andrew Overby and his fight against depression.
Unlike the case of Larry, I have not met Andrew, at least not yet. Our
acquaintance, which I’m not positive is reciprocal, is through blogs and social
networks. Of course the reader should keep in mind that in all these cases I am
definitely not speaking from personal experience: Fate has, so far, been kind
enough to not involve me in anything as serious as what we are talking about.
Nonetheless, the great thing about human beings is that we can communicate our
thoughts and emotions to others, not just in person but through the power of the
written word. Although we will never know exactly what it is like to be another
person, we can certainly gain enough understanding to empathize.
Andrew describes what, from his vantage point, Stoicism can do under his
circumstances. Again, this description isn’t coming from someone like me, who
has never experienced depression and could only give theoretical advice to
others who find themselves in truly difficult circumstances. Rather, Andrew’s
case illustrates practical philosophy at its best—through the testimony of a
human being who discovered firsthand what is and is not helpful to him in
solving his problem. Just as we have seen with Larry, Andrew most certainly
does not claim that Stoicism can somehow magically cure depression.
Nevertheless, he did find something helpful in the practice of Stoicism.
To begin with, he says that one of the crucial things for people affected by
depression is to constantly monitor themselves and their mental condition. If
there is anything that Stoicism trains people to do it is to monitor their own
reactions and reflect critically on how they perceive and interpret the world.
When Andrew wrote about his encounter with Stoicism, he was a young man
of twenty-four suffering from a depression that stemmed in part from the gulf he
had gradually realized existed between his expectations about his life and the
world, on the one hand, and his life and the world as they were, on the other
hand. It seemed like reassessment and perhaps an attempt at partial detachment
were in order. Andrew began to read about Stoicism because he had heard that it
is similar in many ways to Buddhism, and also because during a visit to the
Clinton Library in Arkansas he had discovered that President Clinton held
Marcus Aurelius, the Stoic emperor-philosopher, in high regard. (I will leave to
others a discussion of whether Bill Clinton behaved anything like a Stoic during
his life and career.) Andrew was intrigued. Moreover, one goal of Stoic
philosophy, especially in its Roman period, was to achieve tranquillity—
something that is good for any human being, but especially for someone

suffering from depression. The Stoics attempted to do so by cultivating positive
emotions and monitoring and rejecting negative ones. (We will take a closer look
at these techniques in due time.) Andrew was also attracted by the Stoic spirit of
communality with the rest of humanity, its rejection of attachment to the sort of
external goods that characterize our hyper-consumerist society, and its emphasis
on duty toward others and equanimity in the face of adversity.
Through Stoicism, Andrew learned to turn depression into an asset of sorts.
As he explains: “Depressed people are rather self-aware; in fact, they are too
self-aware, and too negatively so, often deriding themselves for small infractions
of their own idealized standards, putting themselves down for not being perfect
even in a world they recognize as being full of imperfections and human capital
squandered. Part of depression is fixating on failures in the past, ruminating
continually on past events or circumstances, and even drawing a kind of negative
confidence from them. This type of thinking is antithetical to good outcomes at
the present time, at least the vast majority of the time. It causes failure in the
present, building a feedback loop whose hunger cannot be easily filled. One
failure builds atop another, and now another.”
Once Andrew realized this connection between negative thinking and
depression, his mind turned immediately to Epictetus’s dichotomy of control.
Things under our control include our decisions and behaviors; things not under
our control include the circumstances we find ourselves in, as well as other
people’s thoughts and actions. Of course, it’s not like someone is depressed,
reads lines in the Discourses or the Handbook that seem to speak to his situation,
and then voilà!—everything is hunky-dory. But Andrew kept reading and
reflecting. Indeed, the Stoics taught that it is with mindful repetition that we
change our own behaviors and even our internal feelings—something confirmed
by a number of modern psychotherapies that are effective for the treatment of
depression and other conditions.
Another aspect of Stoicism that Andrew found particularly helpful was the
philosophy’s emphasis on using adversity as a training ground for life. Marcus
Aurelius perhaps expressed the idea most forcefully, in the very same
Meditations so admired by Bill Clinton: “The art of life is more like the
wrestler’s art than the dancer’s, in respect of this, that it should stand ready and
firm to meet onsets that are sudden and unexpected.” In a sort of life judo, the
Stoic faces up to adversity by treating life itself as a wrestler in the training ring,
as an opponent who is not (necessarily) out to beat us, but whose purpose is to
keep us on our toes; the Stoic becomes eager to face his opponent because that’s

the way toward self-improvement. As the modern Stoic Bill Irvine puts it: “One
of the most interesting developments in my practice of Stoicism has been my
transformation from someone who dreaded insults into an insult connoisseur. For
one thing, I have become a collector of insults: On being insulted, I analyze and
categorize the insult. For another thing, I look forward to being insulted
inasmuch as it affords me the opportunity to perfect my ‘insult game.’ I know
this sounds strange, but one consequence of the practice of Stoicism is that one
seeks opportunities to put Stoic techniques to work.” Strange, yes, but I can
attest to the same liberating and empowering feeling, and so can Andrew.
His testimony emphasizes two other aspects of Stoic practice that are
particularly helpful to a depressed person, one of them in a somewhat
counterintuitive fashion. The first is Epictetus’s insistence that we look at
“impressions,” that is, at our first reactions to what the world presents us with,
and realize that in many cases they are not what they seem. Think of Irvine’s
“insult game”: what someone says to us is his opinion, which may or may not be
grounded in fact. Whether we perceive someone else’s remark as an insult or not
is entirely up to us, quite regardless of the intention of our interlocutor. Someone
may call me fat, as indeed happened somewhat frequently when I was a young
boy. Well, is it true? At one time in my life it was. In which case, why get
offended? What does it even mean to feel insulted by a fact? Conversely, is it not
true? Then the fellow who hurled the insult is both childish in his behavior and
factually wrong. How is that going to injure me? If anything, he is the one who
loses in the confrontation. Here is how our Epictetus put it to me, as a friendly
challenge: “Stand by a stone and slander it: what effect will you produce? If a
man then listens like a stone, what advantage has the slanderer?… ‘I have done
you an outrage.’ May it turn out to your good.”
The second aspect of Stoic practice that—perhaps surprisingly—Andrew
found very helpful was what modern Stoics call negative visualization. The basic
idea, again adopted by modern cognitive behavioral therapy and similar
approaches, is to regularly focus on potentially bad scenarios, repeating to
yourself that they are not in fact as bad as they may seem, because you have the
inner resources to deal with them. The negative visualization exercise, what the
ancient Romans called premeditatio malorum (literally, foreseeing bad stuff),
may focus on something as mundane as the irritation you feel when someone
cuts you off in traffic or on events as critical as the death of a loved one, or even
your own.
Now, why would anyone, let alone someone who is depressed, want to

imagine the worst on purpose? Well, for one thing there is the empirical
observation that it actually works: visualizing negative happenings decreases our
fear of them and mentally prepares us to deal with the crisis when and if it
ensues. But there is a flip side to visualizing the negative: we gain a renewed
sense of gratitude and appreciation for all the times when bad things do not
happen to us, when we leisurely drive down the road on a beautiful day or enjoy
the presence of our loved ones because they are very much alive and well.
I don’t even know the name of my third fellow Stoic, as the essay I read by
her or him was published anonymously. And I certainly cannot relate to what she
(I will assume she’s a woman for the sake of simplicity) is going through, having
been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder ten years before writing her
article. That was accompanied by depression at the realization that her dream of
an academic career was not to be—not because of external obstacles to
becoming and finding a job as a historian, as formidable as those can be, but
because of her inner obstacles: she simply couldn’t cope with the social
environment of the modern academy. Indeed, her life was dominated by fear of
failure and lack of self-confidence, which eventually landed her in a psychiatric
hospital. When she was released, she rediscovered Stoicism. She had read about
it as a youngster, in a popular book of philosophy for teens, Jostein Gaarder’s
Sophie’s World. Now she Googled “cognitive behavioral therapy,” seeking
practical help, and found the website of a practitioner who traced the roots of the
approach to Buddhism and Stoicism.
She began to read, and eventually she discovered that the Stoic to whom she
responded the most was the Roman playwright and orator Seneca. (I have
observed this fascinating, if anecdotal, thing about modern Stoics: depending,
presumably, on personality, we tend to have a favorite ancient and to be drawn to
his particular way of interpreting the philosophy. My favorite Stoic, obviously, is
Epictetus.) Seneca wrote about self-knowledge and suggested that sometimes we
are the worst obstacles to our own improvement: we see where we should go,
which is where we want to go, and yet somehow we can’t pick ourselves up and
begin the journey. This observation obviously resonated with our anonymous
author: “The problem with some people in the spectrum is knowing what is good
for oneself. Some people with autism reportedly struggle with finding a sense of
purpose for most of their lives.”
A second aspect of Stoic philosophy that spoke to our autistic author was
Seneca’s insistence on the social dimension of human existence. In a famous
passage, he says: “Our relations with one another are like a stone arch, which

would collapse if the stones did not mutually support each other, and which is
upheld in this very way.” Relating to others in a socially useful fashion is still the
author’s biggest challenge, but at least she now has her goals much more clearly
in mind, goals that are being guided by her understanding of Stoicism. And as
Seneca keeps telling her every time she turns to him: “I do not know whether I
shall make progress; but I should prefer to lack success rather than to lack faith.”
The three cases we have briefly examined here have something fundamental
in common: for Larry, just as for Andrew and the anonymous writer, Stoicism
triggered a change in perspective, a profound alteration in how they looked at
their lives. Importantly, this is precisely what the philosophy is meant to do: all
the major Stoic authors insist that it is crucial that we reflect on our condition
and truly make an effort to see things in a different light, one that is both more
rational and more compassionate. And no, those two requirements are most
definitely not at odds with each other, certainly not from a Stoic point of view.
Such a change in perspective helps people to cope better with their situation.
Stoicism is predictably often accused of promoting passive acceptance of things
—despite the fact that the Stoics we know of were most definitely men and
women of action, bent on changing the world for the better to the extent that it
was in their power to do so. Regardless, coping is an essential human skill that is
obviously helpful not just to people confined to wheelchairs, those battling
depression, or those affected by autism. Coping skills are useful to all of us,
since we will always encounter tough situations in life with which we must come
to terms.
Finally, the combination of seeing, and therefore understanding, things
differently and the empowerment that derives from the ability to cope sometimes
opens up new ways of dealing with our problems that perhaps we had not
thought of before—as when the psychiatrist pointed out to Larry (who felt a bit
foolish) a couple of obvious solutions to his problem, one of which turned out to
be eminently practical. Stoicism is no silver bullet. But any philosophy that can
do these things, even under the very challenging conditions we have encountered
in this chapter, certainly deserves our attention and perhaps a shot at being
practiced.

PART III
THE DISCIPLINE OF ASSENT: HOW TO
REACT TO SITUATIONS

CHAPTER 11

ON DEATH AND SUICIDE

I must die, must I? If at once, then I am dying: if soon, I dine now, as it is
time for dinner, and afterwards when the time comes I will die.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, I.1

THE ANCIENT STOICS WERE VERY CONCERNED WITH DEATH. Actually, “concerned” is
precisely the wrong word. They were aware of death and of the importance that
human beings attach to it, but they developed a very unusual and empowering
view of it.
I must confess that I’ve had long and hard conversations with Epictetus about
this topic: the thought of death used to bother me deeply. Indeed, there was a
time in my life when I was thinking about it almost every day, and on some days
more than once. I don’t want you to get the impression that I was ever the
brooding type, prone to depressive thoughts. On the contrary, I’ve always been
reasonably optimistic about life, enjoying or doing my best with whatever
Fortune sends my way (and she has sent a lot, thankfully). Moreover, I am a
biologist. I know that death is a natural occurrence, the result of the particular
evolutionary pathway taken by our ancestors eons ago. (If we were bacteria, for
instance, we wouldn’t die of old age, only of accidents; then again, we wouldn’t
be able to develop philosophies of life either.) Still, the thought of my
consciousness one day ceasing to exist did upset me. Things started to change
when I first read Epictetus’s statement at the beginning of this chapter. I laughed
out loud and thought, What an unbelievably lighthearted attitude toward what
most people think is the most dreadful thing of all.
Epictetus also explained to me why I was so bothered: “Why does an as of
wheat grow? Is it not that it may ripen in the sun? And if it is ripened is it not
that it may be reaped, for it is not a thing apart? If it had feelings then, ought it to
pray never to be reaped at any time? But this is a curse upon wheat—to pray that

it should never be reaped. In like manner know that you are cursing men when
you pray for them not to die: it is like a prayer not to be ripened, not to be
reaped. But we men, being creatures whose fate it is to be reaped, are also made
aware of this very fact, that we are destined for reaping, and so we are angry; for
we do not know who we are, nor have we studied human things as those who are
skilled in horses study the concerns of horses.”
This is an intriguing passage. Epictetus sets forth three interlinked ideas. To
begin with, we are no different from other living beings: like the wheat whose as
are destined to ripen in the sun, we too are destined for “reaping.” The Stoics
took destiny more literally than many of us do today, since they believed in some
sort of cosmic Providence. But even from a thoroughly modern scientific point
of view, we can see that we are one of millions of living species on one of what
are probably billions of habitable planets in the universe.
The second point Epictetus makes is crucial: we are so distraught about the
prospect of our own death precisely because, unlike wheat and most other
species on earth presumably, we are capable of contemplating that thought. And
yet, knowing something does not change the nature of the thing of course—it
just changes our attitude about it. This line of thought thus leads straight back to
the fundamental Stoic idea of the dichotomy of control: death itself is not under
our control (it will happen one way or another), but how we think about death
most definitely is under our control. That’s the part we can and need to work on.
This second point leads to the third one: the analogy between studying human
affairs and—of all things—studying horses. Epictetus is reminding us that if we
are afraid of death, then it is out of ignorance: if we knew or truly understood
more about the human condition—as a horse trainer knows and understands
horses—then we wouldn’t react the way we do to the prospect of our own death.
All of the above notwithstanding, Epictetus sensed that I wasn’t quite
convinced, so he changed tactics, as any good teacher does when faced with a
promising student who nevertheless just refuses to see an important point: “Will
you realize once for all that it is not death that is the source of all man’s evils,
and of a mean and cowardly spirit, but rather the fear of death? Against this fear
then I would have you discipline yourself; to this let all your reasonings, your
lectures, and your trainings be directed; and then you will know that only so do
men achieve their freedom.” This is an idea also taken up by other Stoics, like
Seneca, and by later figures influenced by Stoicism, such as Montaigne: if there
is one thing that philosophy ought to be good for, it is to make us better
understand the human condition by showing us not only how to live to our best

but to accept the fact that death is nothing to be afraid of. Even the Stoics’
archrivals, the Epicureans, thoroughly agreed. As the founder of their school
wrote in his “Letter to Menoeceus”: “Death, therefore, the most awful of evils, is
nothing to us, seeing that, when we are, death is not come, and, when death is
come, we are not.”
What, then, if I fall ill? I asked Epictetus, thinking that perhaps it isn’t death
but the process of dying that is the real issue. “You shall bear illness well.” Of
course, but who shall tend me? “God, and your friends.” But I shall lie on a hard
bed. “But you can do it like a man.” I shall not have a proper house. “If you have
one, you will be ill all the same.” Tough teacher, isn’t he? But by now all of this
makes perfect sense from within the Stoic framework, right? It is a fact of life
that we are stricken by illnesses, and for most of us one of them will eventually
kill us. And we ought to consider ourselves lucky if we do have friends or loved
ones nearby—it will mean that we have been decent-enough people to maintain
such ties with the rest of humanity. Those around us cannot cure our illness or
save us from death, but they can accompany us part of the way, comforting us
before we get there. And of course it would be better to end our journey in a
proper house and on a soft bed, but, really, compared to what will be happening
and should be absorbing our full attention, those are minor details.
So, inevitably, the time will come to die, I continued. “What do you mean by
‘die’?” Epictetus corrected me. “Do not use fine words, but state the facts as they
are. Now is the time for your material part to be restored to the elements of
which it was composed. What is there dreadful in that? What loss to the universe
will this mean, what strange or irrational event?” Again, the reassuring voice of
calm reason. Again, the invitation to take a broader perspective on things rather
than be focused on one’s own self. The astronomer Carl Sagan, one of my
scientific role models when I was a kid, invited us to reflect on the fact that we
literally are stardust: the chemical elements of which we are made originated
after the explosion of a supernova somewhere in the neighborhood of the solar
system, and billions of years of evolution later such matter became the very
molecules that constitute our bodies. It is a wonderful, awe-inspiring thought.
But the converse of that is what Epictetus is getting at: we will, again literally,
return to dust, recycling our chemicals, allowing new living beings to take our
place in the workings of the universe. It doesn’t matter whether those workings
have a point or whether they are just what they are: either way, we came from
cosmic dust and we will return to cosmic dust. If anything, this should make us
even more appreciative of the infinitesimal interval, from a cosmic perspective,

during which we are alive and we eat, drink, and love. Regret at the anticipation
that this interval will end is not just irrational but entirely unhelpful.
And yet, some people are not persuaded of this at all. On the contrary, a
number of techno-optimists think that death is a disease that should be cured,
and they are investing good money in the effort. Broadly speaking, they call
themselves “Transhumanists,” and quite a few of them can be found among the
white male millionaires in Silicon Valley, where many of the world’s most
influential tech companies are located. Perhaps the most famous and influential
of the bunch is Ray Kurzweil, a futurist (someone who thinks he can study and
predict the future) currently working at Google to develop a software capable of
understanding natural language.
Kurzweil has a number of important achievements under his belt, including
the development of the first omni-font optical character recognition system. Age
sixty-eight at the time of this writing, he has been arguing for some time that the
way to immortality will be to upload our consciousness into a computer, which
he claims will be possible any day now. Indeed, we better manage that feat
before the so-called Singularity, a term invented by the mathematician Stanisław
Ulam to describe the moment when computers will outsmart people and begin to
drive technological progress independently—and perhaps even in spite—of
humanity itself.
This is not the place to explain why I think the whole idea of a Singularity is
predicated on a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of intelligence, or
why “uploading” our consciousness to a computer is extremely unlikely to ever
be possible, since consciousness is neither a thing nor a piece of software. Here
I’m more interested in the chutzpah displayed by people like Kurzweil as well as
by his almost cultlike following, who think of themselves as so important that
they ought to, godlike, transcend the laws of nature itself, never mind the fact
that they are spending inordinate amounts of money and energy that could be
directed toward ameliorating actual, urgent problems the world faces right now,
or the disastrous ethical and environmental consequences of their success (if it
were possible). Who, exactly, would have access to the new technology, and at
what price? If we succeed in becoming physically immortal—the alternative to
uploading hoped for by some Transhumanists—will we keep having children? If
so, how would an already diseased planet sustain the thirst for natural resources
of a population that grows so relentlessly and manage its ever-escalating
production of waste products? Ah, but we will expand beyond Earth! We shall
colonize other worlds! Never mind that we still don’t know of any other

habitable worlds in the galaxy, or that we have no clue about how to get to them,
if they’re out there. The more I think about Transhumanism the more the word
hubris, famously invented by the Greeks precisely for such thinking, seems
awfully appropriate.
The likes of Kurzweil simply don’t want to leave the party, it seems to me, no
matter what the cost, and regardless of how privileged they have been while
attending it. Which is why I imagine him having this conversation with
Epictetus: “No, I wanted to go on feasting.” “Yes, those at the Mysteries too
want to go on with the ceremony, and those at Olympia to see fresh competitors,
but the festival is at an end. Leave it and depart, in a thankful and modest spirit;
make room for others. Others must come into being, even as you did, and being
born must have room and dwellings and necessaries. But if the first comers do
not retire, what is left for them? Why will nothing satisfy or content you? Why
do you crowd the world’s room?” Which brings me to the second, far more
delicate, topic of this chapter, and one to which the Stoics devoted a lot of
thought that I think is very much of relevance to us moderns: suicide.

ON THE WEEKEND OF JULY 23 AND 24, 2016, THE PERFORMANCE artist Betsy Davis

hosted a party with thirty or so of her closest friends and family. The occasion
was joyous, with people playing cello and harmonica, drinking cocktails and
eating pizza, and watching one of Betsy’s favorite movies, The Dance of Reality.
A bit before sunset on Sunday the guests left, and Betsy watched the sunset on
her wraparound porch. Shortly after, in the presence of her caretaker, her doctor,
her massage therapist, and her sister, Betsy took a cocktail of morphine,
pentobarbital, and chloral hydrate prescribed by her doctor and died peacefully.
You see, Betsy was suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, also
known as Lou Gehrig’s disease. She had almost completely lost control of her
muscles; at forty-one, she not only was unable to perform but could no longer
brush her teeth or scratch an itch, let alone stand. Her speech was slurred and
had to be translated to others. She took the dignified way out, thanks to the
recently enacted California law on assisted suicide. Hers was a beautiful, heartwrenching story, which I related to Epictetus. “If it is not to your profit, the door
stands open: if it is to your profit, bear it. For in every event the door must stand
open and then we have no trouble,” he calmly replied. The “open door” was the
standard phrase he used with his students whenever he wanted to talk about
suicide. Seeing my puzzlement, he elaborated: “Suppose someone made the

room smoke. If the smoke is moderate I will stay: if excessive, I go out: for one
must remember and hold fast to this, that the door is open. The order comes, ‘Do
not dwell in Nicopolis.’ I will not. ‘Nor in Athens.’ I give up Athens. ‘Nor in
Rome.’ I give up Rome. ‘Dwell in Gyara.’ I dwell in Gyara: but this seems to me
a very smoky room indeed, and I depart where no one shall hinder me from
dwelling: for that dwelling is open to every man.”
Before we examine this more closely, allow me to insert an interesting
historical parenthesis about Gyara, apparently the place where Epictetus thought
one might have a hard enough time standing to actually consider walking
through “the open door.” Gyara is a small Greek island in the Cyclades to which
the ancient Romans exiled troublemakers. One such troublemaker was none
other than Musonius Rufus, Epictetus’s teacher, who was sent there by the
emperor Nero for allegedly participating in the Pisonian conspiracy—a charge
unlikely to have been true. (That was the second time Musonius was sent into
exile.) The practice of sending exiles to the island, which is apparently pretty
arid, was later resurrected by the military junta that controlled Greece from 1967
to 1974. This time it was leftist intellectuals who played the part of the Stoics;
about 22,000 of them were sent there. However bad the conditions are on Gyara,
it must be said that Musonius may have been tougher than even Epictetus, since
he didn’t choose the open door, but rather waited on the island until he was
recalled to Rome.
Getting back to Epictetus, there are a number of important things to notice in
the passage just quoted. To begin with, he very clearly states that deciding
whether or not to walk through the “door” is a matter of personal judgment,
pertinent to specific situations. If the situation is truly unbearable for you, then
you have the option to leave. Second, and crucially, the door must stand open
and then we will have no trouble: what will make it possible for us to withstand
harsh conditions and very difficult periods in our lives will be precisely that we
always have an alternative course of action at our disposal. Just as, for the
Stoics, death itself is what gives urgent meaning to life, the possibility of leaving
life voluntarily gives us the courage to do what is right under otherwise
unbearable circumstances. Finally, notice the reference to the coming of an
“order” to leave. Scholars of Epictetus have shown that he is talking about God
here, but in a very subtle way, which is once again compatible with either a
religious or a secular reading.
Recall that Epictetus, more so than other Stoics, believed in Providence, that
is, in a general plan for the cosmos. That plan, however, was not laid out by a

personal God who answers prayers or is concerned with the fate of individuals.
Epictetus explained the idea to me using yet another analogy: “For the foot (for
instance), I shall say it is natural to be clean, but if you take it as a foot and not
as a detached thing, it will be fitting for it to walk in the mud and tread upon
thorns and sometimes to be cut off for the sake of the whole body: or else it will
cease to be a foot. We must hold exactly the same sort of view about ourselves.”
That explains the sense in which someone might receive a “call” to cut himself
off the rest of the (cosmic) body, so to speak. But how are we to know about the
call? How do we interpret the will of the universe? We make use of reason. It is
therefore entirely up to us, individually, to examine the situation and decide
whether we hear the call of the cosmos—so to speak—or not. It is, in other
words, our own judgment that tells us whether it is time to walk through the
open door or whether we should stay and fight another day.
Being practical philosophers, the Stoics fine-tuned their ability to make such
judgments by reflecting on examples from the past, just as the story of Betsy
Davis had me reflecting on disease and mortality. The very first mention of a
Stoic committing suicide concerns Zeno of Cyprus, the founder of Stoicism.
Diogenes Laertius, in his Lives of the Eminent Philosophers, tells a number of
different stories about how Zeno died (only one of which can be true, obviously).
One says that, being old, frail, and in pain, he decided that he had nothing more
to contribute to society, so he starved himself to death. This may or may not have
happened, but the story is significant because it introduces the idea that it is
acceptable for Stoics to walk through the open door under certain circumstances,
given that it is possible that the very founder of the school did it.
There are several more examples from Stoic lore, but I’ll mention just two of
them in order to broaden our view of the topic. We have already encountered
Cato the Younger, who literally tore his guts out so as not to fall into the hands
of Julius Caesar. The last example is Seneca, a rather controversial figure even
within Stoic circles. It is not at all clear just how much Seneca lived up to his
own philosophy, given his involvement with Nero’s regime. He has been
portrayed as everything from a hypocritical schemer to a secular saint, with the
truth likely being somewhere in the middle: he was a flawed man (as he himself
repeatedly wrote) who tried his best under nearly impossible circumstances.
Seneca succeeded in guiding Nero and containing the damage for the first five
years of his reign, even if he eventually lost control of the increasingly unhinged
emperor. Regardless, as mentioned earlier, he was suspected of being part of the
Pisonian conspiracy that sent Musonius into exile, also probably on trumped-up

charges. Nero ordered Seneca to commit suicide, which he did, at age sixty-nine.
He could have resisted (probably in vain), tried to escape, or pleaded for his life,
as many others did. Instead, he chose a dignified exit, in part to retain his
integrity, and in part to preserve at least some of the family assets so that
surviving relatives could inherit them.
I’ve brought up the examples of Zeno, Cato, and Seneca, with all the due
historical caveats, because they illustrate five different reasons for walking
through the open door. Zeno did so because he was in increasingly unbearable
pain, and he also felt that he had become useless to society—not very different
from the case of Betsy Davis. Cato walked through the open door for principled
reasons in defense of a political cause. Seneca did so as a matter of personal
dignity and to safeguard the people he was leaving behind. (To this list one can
add the attempted suicide of James Stockdale.) Some of these reasons for
committing suicide are being debated today in military, moral, and medical
circles, so that the Stoics still have very much to contribute to our evolving view
of the world. We certainly regard as heroes those people who sacrifice their lives
for the greater good, and an increasing number of countries are allowing, or at
least considering, forms of assisted suicide like the one made possible by
California lawmakers to aid people who feel, as seemed to be the case with Zeno
twenty-three centuries ago, that they are at the end of their life. Of course, these
notions are controversial, as political suicide can be as virtuous as Cato’s (or
Stockdale’s, had he succeeded), but also as horrible as that of modern-day
suicide bombers. And ending our lives on our own terms is seen as empowering
by some but as a sacrilege against the sanctity of life by others.
Then there is the danger that someone may commit suicide for no good
reason. A Stoic rationale should never be deployed, for instance, in the case of
people who are mentally ill and require aid in recovering, not in ending, their
life. Similarly, there are trivial excuses to commit suicide that would most
certainly not receive the approval of a Stoic. For instance, after the publication
of Goethe’s The Sorrows of Young Werther in 1774, there were a number of
copycat suicides among young men who fancied themselves to be real-life
versions of the story’s protagonist. This led to the banning of the book in several
places. In 1974 the sociologist David Phillips coined the term “Werther effect” to
refer to the general phenomenon of so-called suicide contagion, often inspired by
the suicide of celebrities, fictional or otherwise.
Epictetus, ever the wise man, was aware of this danger, and made it clear to
me that a light attitude toward taking one’s own life was not the Stoic way: “Let

me describe another state of mind to be found in those who hear these precepts
amiss. A friend of mine, for instance, determined for no reason to starve himself.
I learnt of it when he was in the third day of his fasting, and went and asked him
what had happened. ‘I have decided,’ said he. Yes, but, for all that, say what it
was that persuaded you; for if your decision was right, here we are at your side
ready to help you to leave this life, but, if your decision was against reason, then
change your mind. ‘A man must abide by his decisions.’ What are you doing,
man? Not all decisions, but right decisions.” Epictetus added: “Stay where you
are, and depart not without reason.”

CHAPTER 12

HOW TO DEAL WITH ANGER, ANXIETY, AND LONELINESS

Wherever I go, there is the sun, there is the moon, there are the stars,
dreams, auguries, conversation with the gods.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, III.22

PHILOSOPHERS ARE OFTEN CARICATURED AS ALOOF, FOREVER engaged in navelgazing of no interest to the rest of us. Or worse: they may simply be intellectual
frauds, pretending to think deep thoughts while in fact they are peddling either
nonsense or trivialities disguised by incomprehensible language. Already in 423
BCE, the great Greek playwright Aristophanes made fun of Socrates in The
Clouds, depicting him as a sophist (not a compliment, neither then nor ever
since), though apparently the then-forty-five-year-old sage took it in stride: it is
reported that when some foreigners who were attending the play asked, “Who is
this Socrates?” he cheerfully stood up in order to be identified by the crowd in
the theater.
Perhaps in reaction to this intellectual excess, real or perceived as it may have
been, the Hellenistic (immediately post-Socratic) philosophies all tended to
emphasize pragmatism—and none more so, arguably, than Stoicism. Little is
more pragmatic than learning to manage anger, anxiety, and loneliness, three
major plagues of modern life. Of course, once again, this isn’t your standard
self-help book promising silver bullets: we are going to deal with these issues
calmly, reasonably, and with realistic expectations, just as a proper Stoic would
do.
This is an attitude that, of course, I learned from our friend during one of our
conversations, when he told me:
Yesterday I had an iron lamp beside my household gods, and hearing a
noise I rushed to the window. I found the lamp had been carried off. I

reasoned with myself, that the man who took it yielded to some plausible
feeling. What do I conclude? Tomorrow, I say, you will find one of
earthenware. I lost my lamp, because in the matter of vigilance the thief
was a stronger man than I. But he bought his lamp for this price: for a
lamp he became a thief, for a lamp he broke his faith, for a lamp he
became a brute.
As usual, there is a lot packed into what Epictetus is saying, and it took some
mulling over his words before I fully appreciated his take. First off, notice that
he is not distraught or angry, but matter-of-fact; moreover, he immediately
reaches a couple of pragmatic conclusions: that what he lost was easily
replaceable (tomorrow I will find another lamp), and that if he wishes to avoid
another theft, perhaps he should opt for a cheaper but equally effective item (a
lamp of earthenware, rather than iron), because it just isn’t worthwhile trying to
beat a thief at the vigilance game. Then comes the analysis of the deeper
meaning of the incident: Epictetus acknowledges that the thief must have yielded
to some plausible feeling—he must have reckoned that what he was doing was
worth the price. But our sage disagrees with the judgment of the thief, whose
conclusion he finds highly questionable: he gained an iron lamp, but in the
transaction he lost something much more precious—his integrity.
I had an unfortunate opportunity to test Epictetus’s teachings while I was
writing this book. I had just boarded the A-line subway train in Rome with my
companion; we were on our way to meet my brother and his wife for a leisurely
evening. While entering the train car, I felt an unusually strong resistance from a
guy nearby, who was forcefully pushing back despite the fact that there was
ample room for both of us in the car, which was crowded but not unbearably so.
When I finally realized—a few seconds later—what was actually going on, it
was too late: while I was being distracted by the unyielding fellow, his friend
lifted my wallet from the left front pocket of my trousers and swiftly exited the
subway car just before the doors closed. The thief had indeed beaten me at the
vigilance game, and kudos to him for his dexterity. My first impression, as the
Stoics would say, was one of surprise and frustration at having been fooled. But
my mind again quickly went back to Epictetus, and I steadfastly refused to grant
assent to that impression. Okay, I had lost my wallet, some cash, and a few credit
cards that needed to be blocked. Oh, and my driver’s license, which had to be
replaced. With good modern electronic technologies, taking care of all that took
only a few keystrokes on my smart phone (which was still in my other front

pocket!) and a few days’ wait. But the thief had lost his integrity in the bargain.
Before my practice of Stoicism, an experience like this would probably have
made me angry and resentful for the rest of the evening, which would not have
done any of us any good (nor would that response have affected the thief or
brought back my wallet). Instead, it took only a few minutes to mentally process
what had taken place, and by the time we met my brother and his wife all was
good with my mind, which had returned to a more tranquil state, and we were
able to enjoy a nice evening at the movies.
Neither Epictetus’s story about the lamp nor my subway incident should be
interpreted as counseling a fatalistic or defeatist attitude. Rather, both suggest
that we step back and analyze a situation more rationally, always keeping in
mind the dichotomy of control between what is and is not in our power. It is not
in our power to make thievery disappear from the world, but it is in our power to
engage in a battle of attention with thieves, if we think that’s worth our efforts
and time. It is not in our power to change the robber’s judgment that forgoing his
integrity in exchange for a lamp or a wallet is a good bargain, but it is in our
power to make the reverse judgment ourselves.
Rephrasings, you may have noticed, are important in Stoicism. There are
correspondences in Christianity (hate the sin, not the sinner), and according to
modern psychological research, recasting a situation is a crucial component of
anger and emotional management. Still, I was wondering whether Epictetus
wasn’t a bit too casual about his attitude toward robbery and crime, so I pointed
that out to him. I should have seen the response coming: “‘What!’ you say.
‘Ought not this robber and this adulterer to be put to death?’ Nay, say not so, but
rather, ‘Should I not destroy this man who is in error and delusion about the
greatest matters and is blinded not merely in the vision which distinguishes
white and black, but in the judgement which distinguishes good and evil?’ If you
put it this way, you will recognize how inhuman your words are; that it is like
saying, ‘Should I not kill this blind man, or this deaf one?’” I actually hadn’t
suggested anything like the death penalty, but the point was well taken: if we
understand the ancient Greek concept of amathia, we know that it is more
helpful to think of people who do bad things as mistaken and therefore to be
pitied and helped if possible, not condemned as evil. Although not very much
practiced, especially in the United States, this same idea is behind some of the
most progressive, and effective, approaches to reforming criminals as
implemented, for instance, in a number of European countries.
It is rather instructive to look at the advice of the American Psychological

Association for people dealing with anger and frustration, because it very closely
resembles the early intuitions of the Stoics—strengthened, of course, by a
significant amount of systematic empirical findings. To begin with, the APA
counsels engaging in a series of relaxation techniques. These include deep
breathing (from the diaphragm, not the chest), coupled with a simple and
meaningful mantra. You can also use imagery—visualizing, for instance, a
calming or pleasant situation—and engage in some sort of nonstrenuous
exercise, like yoga stretching. Although the Stoics didn’t deploy the concept of
mantra, they constantly advised practitioners to keep simple, pithy phrases at
hand and to reach for them as soon as they saw trouble. Indeed, the entire
Enchiridion, Arrian’s summary of Epictetus’s Discourses, can be considered a
handy set of quick reminders of crucial points for use on the spur of the moment.
And Seneca explicitly advised taking a deep breath and going for a walk around
the block upon first feeling the uncontrollable rise of rage, which he considered a
type of temporary madness. He also said, in his letters to his friend Lucilius, that
it is good to exercise regularly, even in old age, not just because exercise keeps
the body in decent shape, but because it has a calming effect on the mind. I have
found all of this advice to be very effective: my favorite immediate reaction,
whenever I sense that I’m beginning to lose control, is to excuse myself, retreat
to a quiet place where I can do a little deep breathing (even a bathroom will do!),
and mentally repeat my favorite mantra: bear and forbear, which is a standard
Epictetian phrase.
This advice, a sort of physiological and mental first-aid kit, is useful for
immediate crises, but a number of longer-term strategies must also be deployed
if anger is to be effectively managed, according to the APA. One set of strategies
involves cognitive restructuring, of which we have seen plenty of Stoic
examples, including the ones just discussed. The APA tells us to change standard
phrases like “this is terrible!” to something along the lines of “I’d rather not have
to deal with this, but I can manage it, and getting angry isn’t going to help me at
all.” Moreover, the suggestion is to transform demands into desires, in
recognition that the world isn’t just going to bow down to whatever we like. This
is very similar to the modern Stoic idea, proposed by Bill Irvine, of learning to
internalize goals: I desire (not want or need) a promotion, so I’m going to do my
best to deserve it. Whether I actually get it or not is not under my control,
because it depends on a number of factors external to my will. As an APA article
on anger management—which could easily have been written by Epictetus—
reminds us: “Logic defeats anger, because anger, even when it’s justified, can

quickly become irrational. So use cold hard logic on yourself.”
Next, the APA advises us to engage in problem-solving (rather than
complaining), but warns us against a common fallacy: we need to realize that—
contra common cultural belief—it just isn’t the case that every problem has a
solution. We therefore need to cut ourselves some slack for not being able to
solve everything, so long as we have done all we can reasonably do under the
circumstances. Don’t focus on just finding a solution, the APA advises, but on
how to handle the entire situation, including the possibility of not succeeding in
the endeavor. Again, echoes of ancient wisdom abound here.
Another crucial way of handling anger is classified by the APA as “better
communication,” specifically better communication with people who make you
angry. Interestingly, a large component of this advice relies again on Stoic
precepts: we should try to describe the situation making us angry as
dispassionately and accurately as possible, what Epictetus called giving assent to
(or withdrawing assent from) our impressions, as I did when my wallet was
stolen. Rather than reacting immediately to what another person is saying—
which is never a good idea, as doing so will simply escalate a heated situation—
we can slow down, rephrase what the other person is saying, take the time to
analyze the possible underlying reasons, and only then respond. For example,
you may interpret a request from your companion as an undue and irritating
invasion of your personal space. But could it be that the request arises from your
companion’s need for more attention and care, a need that could be
accommodated in some other way that would not make you feel like you have
entered a prison?
The APA also counsels humor as an antidote to anger, and we have seen this
deployed both by ancient Stoics like Epictetus (If I have to die now, then I die
now; but if later, then now I’m going to dine, because it’s dinnertime) and by
modern ones like Irvine (Oh, you think that essay I wrote was fundamentally
misguided? That’s because you haven’t read all my other essays!). However, the
APA also rightly recommends using humor judiciously: we should neither
simply laugh off our problems (or, worse, other people’s) nor cross the fuzzy line
between humor and sarcasm. Sarcasm, an aggressive and belittling type of
response, is rarely useful, and certainly not in those situations that involve
conflict and anger. But how do we tell the difference between humor and
sarcasm? That takes practice as well as exercising the cardinal virtue of wisdom,
which is precisely about learning how to navigate complex situations that have
no clear line dividing black from white—like, you know, almost all of real life.

Additional suggestions from professional psychologists include changing
your environment, for instance, by taking a physical break from the problematic
situation; shifting the timing of your interaction with another person if the
present moment seems not to be the best time to handle the problem, but being
sure to set an alternative time for coming back to it in order to send the signal
that you are not dodging it; practicing avoidance by not exposing yourself, if
possible, to the cause of your distress; and finding alternative ways of doing
what you need to do that may reduce the opportunity for conflict while still
allowing you to accomplish your goals. We don’t find all of these suggestions in
the ancient Stoic texts, but they’re all in synch with the fundamental Stoic idea
that to live a good life we have to learn about how the world actually works (as
opposed to how we wish it would work), and that we must also learn how to
reason correctly in order to best handle the world as it is. Appreciating and using
the pertinent findings of modern psychology to flourish in our lives, then, is a
most Stoic thing to do.

EPICTETUS HAD A FEW INTERESTING THINGS TO TELL ME about anxiety as well. I used
to be more anxious than I am now, a change that I attribute largely to experience
(as it turns out, many things are not as bad as one imagines them to be before
they happen) and a bit of the emotional maturity that is almost inevitable with
the passing of the years and the changing of one’s hormonal profile. But
Epictetus helped me make an additional leap forward. He pointed out, for
instance, that just as anger isn’t usually very reasonable, neither is anxiety, and
in fact both feelings can seriously get in the way of our projects and our quality
of life.
Why are we so anxious about all sorts of things? “When I see a man in a state
of anxiety, I say, ‘What can this man want? If he did not want something which
is not in his power, how could he still be anxious? It is for this reason that one
who sings to the lyre is not anxious when he is performing by himself, but when
he enters the theatre, even if he has a very good voice and plays well: for he not
only wants to perform well, but also to win a great name, and that is beyond his
own control.’” This is yet another version of Epictetus’s cardinal idea of the
dichotomy of control, but the way he puts it in this passage struck me as so
obviously true, and so applicable to countless personal experiences, that my
reaction was a loud “Duh! How could I have missed this?”
When I go, say, in front of a classroom full of students, I have no reason to be

anxious, because I am well prepared to explain the material at hand. I’m a
professional, I know what I’m doing, and I have a lot of experience with the
subject matter—certainly much more than any of my students. The anxiety, then,
is caused by an underlying fear of somehow disappointing the students, of not
being sufficiently clear, entertaining, helpful, and so on. But the only way to
avoid such failures is to do what I have already done: prepare myself to the best
of my abilities. Nothing else can be done, so there is no cause for (additional)
concern, much less for anxiety over the outcome. This, again, is not counsel to
ignore or belittle my duties to my students. It is simply a reasonable
reassessment of the situation I find myself in, in order to arrive at a useful
distinction between the things that I should and should not be concerned about.
Moreover, should I indeed “embarrass” myself in front of my class, what exactly
is the worst thing that could happen? That some young people will laugh at my
mistake, whatever it was? Worse things happen at sea, you know, as the Monty
Python song goes.
Let me be clear that I am perfectly aware that some disorders of the mind
may cause a type of anxiety that “cold hard logic,” as the APA puts it, won’t be
able to overcome by itself. But those are disorders, that is, pathological
conditions, for which modern psychology and psychiatry are beginning—
however imperfectly—to provide remedies, in the form of both talk and
pharmaceutical therapies. As my colleague Lou Marinoff put it in the preface to
his best-selling book Plato, Not Prozac!, these therapies will accomplish the
important, but insufficient, task of calming your mind to the point where you can
be functional again. That by itself won’t do the thinking for you, and it is a
rethinking of a whole host of life’s situations that promises to provide a path to
eudaimonia.
That is why it is peculiar that people tend to pay attention to, and be worried
by, exactly the wrong sort of things. Epictetus explained it to me this way: “We
are anxious for our bit of a body, for our bit of property, for what Caesar will
think, but are not anxious at all for what is within us. Am I anxious about not
conceiving a false thought? No, for that depends on myself. Or about indulging
an impulse contrary to nature? No, not about this either.” The point here is more
philosophical than psychological, of course; Epictetus is addressing the longterm course of our lives rather than whatever immediate problem we may face.
But his point is crucial nonetheless. A religious person, putting it slightly
differently, would speak in terms of taking care of one’s soul rather than just
one’s body and possessions, but the idea is the same: we tend to adopt upside-

down priorities, to be worried about things that are ultimately less important and
definitely less under our control than what we should really be worried about
and focusing energy and time on. Let Caesar (or your boss) think what he may—
you yourself have to attend to the crucial task of improving your character and
maintaining your integrity. If he is a good person, Caesar (or your boss) will
appreciate it. If he is not, the loss, ultimately, is his no less than it was for the
thief who stole Epictetus’s lamp, and the one who lifted my wallet.

I LIVE IN A BIG CITY, AND YET I SPEND MOST OF THE DAY ON my own, reading and
writing, either at home or in one of my two offices, both of which are usually
devoid of colleagues or students. I spend my time this way by choice, and it suits
my personality very well. But I couldn’t help bringing up the issue of loneliness
with Epictetus, since it seems to be a major one affecting modern society—not
just the Western variety, and not only in big cities. It isn’t difficult these days to
find headlines that read: “The Loneliness Epidemic: We’re More Connected
Than Ever—But Are We Feeling More Alone?,” “Is Modern Life Making Us
Lonely?,” “The Loneliness of American Society,” and so forth.
A paper published by Colin Killeen in the Journal of Advanced Nursing
offers an interesting discussion of loneliness from a modern, scientific
perspective. To begin with, Killeen distinguishes loneliness from similar, yet
separate, related concepts, such as alienation (which may be the result, or in
some cases the cause, of depression) and solitude (which actually has a positive
connotation, more akin to my own behavior). Interestingly, the paper presents a
classification of what Killeen calls the “alienation-connectedness continuum”
from negative to positive—alienation <> loneliness <> social isolation <>
aloneness <> solitude <> connectedness—with society’s perspective ranging
from negative at the alienation extreme to positive at the connectedness one. The
author superimposes on this continuum what he calls a “choice continuum”—
from no choice (alienation, loneliness) at one extreme to total choice (solitude,
connectedness) at the other. This choice continuum, of course, pertains to
external causes of loneliness, not to internal attitudes, which are more within the
proper domain of Stoic thought.
What are the causes of loneliness? The Killeen paper provides a handy
summary diagram identifying a series of causes related to our situations and our
characters that lead to loneliness, including bereavement, psychological
vulnerability, reduced social network, depression, and radical life changes. These

are accompanied by a number of associated factors, including age, gender, and
health. The bottom line, in Killeen’s view, is that there is no “solution” to the
problem of loneliness, because it is highly multifactorial and because it depends
on both personal (psychological, situational) and structural (societal) factors.
What then? Here is the author’s surprisingly sober yet refreshingly honest
commentary: “[Loneliness] is such an innate part of the human psyche, that it
cannot be solved like a puzzle; it can only be alleviated and made less painful.
This can only be achieved by increasing humankind’s awareness of this
distressing condition that everyone has to endure in some way, shape or form,
sometime during their lives, about which there is nothing to be embarrassed.”
Those words resonate for me in part because they forcefully remind me of
Epictetus’s advice on the same subject: “The forlorn state is the condition of one
without help. For a man is not forlorn simply because he is alone, any more than
a man in a crowd is unforlorn. For according to its conception the term ‘forlorn’
means that a man is without help, exposed to those who wish to harm him. But
nevertheless a man must prepare himself for solitude too—he must be able to
suffice for himself, and able to commune with himself.” As Killeen says: there is
no reason to be embarrassed because (some degree of) loneliness is a natural
condition for humanity, and Stoics reject the whole idea of embarrassment,
especially with respect to societal expectations, because we have no influence
over other people’s judgments, only over our own behavior. Notice also
Killeen’s use of the word “endure,” which is very much what Epictetus is talking
about.
One distinction between loneliness and being alone would have been
perfectly clear to the Stoics: the latter is a factual description, while the former is
a judgment we superimpose on that description, and it is that judgment, not the
naked fact, that makes us feel rejected and powerless. Importantly, however,
there is a positive message in Epictetus’s words, which can seem rather stern at
first glance: the other side of endurance is resilience, and resilience is
empowering. We may have little or no control over the external circumstances
that force us into being alone at some times in our lives. But (save for
pathological conditions, for which one needs to seek medical help), it is our
choice, our own attitude, that turns solitude into loneliness. We may be alone,
but we do not consequently need to feel helpless.

CHAPTER 13

LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP

Whoever then has knowledge of good things, would know how to love
them; but how could one who cannot distinguish good things from evil
and things indifferent from both have power to love?
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, II.22

ONE DAY A DISTRAUGHT FATHER CAME TO SEEK EPICTETUS’S counsel. His daughter
was terribly ill, and he simply couldn’t stand it any longer, so he ran from the
house in pain: “I am so miserable about my poor children, that lately when my
daughter was ill and was thought to be in danger I could not bear to be near her,
but fled away from her, until someone brought me news that she was well.”
“Well, do you think you were right to do it?”
“It was natural, all fathers, or most of us, at least, feel like that.”
Epictetus engaged the distraught father at length, because the Stoics made a
big deal of “following nature,” by which, however, they did not mean just doing
whatever comes “naturally”—like leaving your own child in the care of others
because you are experiencing too much pain. Epictetus told the man that he
didn’t deny that many fathers felt like he did, or that it was a natural way for
fathers to feel. The question, though, was whether it was right. So he proceeded
in classical Socratic fashion: “Was it right, I ask, for you, being affectionately
disposed to your child, to run away and leave her? Is her mother not fond of the
child?”
“She is indeed.”
“Should the mother then have left her too, or should she not?”
“She should not.”
“What of the nurse? Is she fond of the child?”
“She is.”
“Ought she then to have left her?”

“By no means.”
“Again, is not the child’s attendant fond of her?”
“He is.”
“Ought he then to have gone away and left her? Was it right that as a
consequence the child should be thus left desolate and helpless because of the
great affection of you its parents and of those about it, or should die in the hands
of those who had no love or care for it?”
“Heaven forbid!”
“Tell me, would you have liked, if you were ill, your relations and everyone
else, even your wife and children, to show their affection for you in such a way
as to leave you alone and desolate?”
“Certainly not!”
“Would you pray to be so loved by your own people, as to be always left
alone by them when you were ill, because of their exceeding affection, or would
you, if it were a question of being left alone, rather pray, supposing that were
possible, to have the affection of your enemies?”
You see where this is going. And yet many people misunderstand what
Epictetus, and the Stoics more generally, were up to here. Sure, we can follow
his undeniable logic, but isn’t he saying that a father’s love for his daughter boils
down to duty? And isn’t that a rather sterile, even inhuman, view of love and
affection?
It would be, if that superficial reading of the anecdote reflected what
Epictetus actually meant, but it doesn’t—far from it. The point, rather, is that
human affection needs to be guided—trained even—by a sound assessment of
whatever situation triggers our feelings. It is undeniably true that the father
should not have left his daughter just to avoid being in pain himself. This is
elegantly shown by Epictetus, both by way of making the parallel between the
father and his daughter’s other caretakers—in comparison to whom he clearly
behaved badly—and by asking the man to consider for a minute whether he
himself, had he been in the place of his daughter, would have appreciated similar
behavior from a loved one.
But that’s only half of the Stoic point: there is a difference between what is
natural and what is right, and we ought to arrive at correct judgments that will
sometimes make us override what is natural in favor of what is right. This point
derives from the Stoic theory of oikeiôsis, which we have already encountered in
the form of Hierocles’s widening (or, to be precise, contracting) circles of
concern. The idea is that we begin life with only instinctual behaviors, some of

which are rather selfish, just like the father’s “natural” reaction to his daughter’s
pain. Once we enter the age of reason in mid-childhood, however, we begin to be
able to reflect on things and to separate natural from good when necessary. But
this isn’t just a matter of letting “cold” reason take over our emotions. It doesn’t
work that way, and if the Stoics had really advocated such a simplistic notion,
they’d have been really poor psychologists—which they most definitely were
not.
Epictetus once told his students: “But though we are capable of writing and
reading these sentiments, though we can praise them as we read, yet they do not
bring conviction to us, nor anything like it. Wherefore the proverb about the
Lacedaemonians, Lions at home, foxes at Ephesus, will fit us too. In the lectureroom we are lions, and foxes in the world outside!” What he meant was that
simply recognizing the truth of something is not enough: you need to practice it,
over and over, until you develop a habit that incorporates a rational conclusion
into your instinctual repertoire. Think of practicing philosophy in the same way
you learn to drive a car, or to kick a soccer ball, or to play the saxophone.
Initially, it’s all about paying conscious attention to what you’re doing, and
asking why, and as a result you are pretty bad at it, constantly making mistakes
and getting frustrated. But little by little, the repetition of deliberate movements
makes your actions more and more automatic, until it becomes second nature to
hit the brakes when someone unexpectedly crosses the street, to pass the ball to
your teammate who is suddenly unguarded by the other team’s defense, or to hit
the right sequence of notes at the right pace to produce the melody you want out
of your instrument. True philosophy is a matter of a little theory and a lot of
practice: “We see that the carpenter becomes a carpenter by learning certain
things, the helmsman becomes a helmsman by learning certain things. May we,
then, infer that in the sphere of conduct too it is not enough merely to wish to
become good, but one must learn certain things?… For it is not arguments that
are wanting nowadays: no, the books of the Stoics are full of them. What then is
the one thing wanting? We want the man who will apply his arguments, and bear
witness to them by action.”
Despite Epictetus’s (right) emphasis on practice, the ancient Greeks actually
developed a sophisticated theoretical understanding of love, espousing a number
of different conceptions of it, some of which are pertinent to the second subject
of this chapter: friendship. Typically, scholars distinguish among agápe, éros,
philía, and storgē Agápe refers to the sort of love that you feel for your spouse
and children, and that later on Christians associated with God’s love for all

humanity: as Thomas Aquinas put it, agápe is to will the good of another. If you
think you know what éros means, you may have to think again. Yes, the word
does carry the overt meaning of sensual pleasure and sexual attraction, but, as
Plato explained in the Symposium, éros develops into an appreciation of the
inner beauty of a person, through which we express our admiration for beauty
itself, regardless of its specific incarnation. Philía is the dispassionate, virtuous
love that we feel for friends, family, and community because we see and treat
them as equal to ourselves. Finally, storgē, a far less frequently used word,
specifically refers to love for your children but also, interestingly, for your
country or sports team. It carries the meaning of an inherently felt love that has
nothing to do with reason or reflection.
It is hard to deny that the single English word “love” simply doesn’t quite
catch all of these nuances, which is unfortunate, since we surely ought to
distinguish the love we feel toward our partners, children, and friends from what
we feel for, say, our country and God. In all cases, however, the Stoic question
would be the very same one that Epictetus posed to the distraught father: it may
be natural, but is it right?
We are often told, for instance, that we should love our country, “right or
wrong,” or our sports team regardless of whether they win or lose. I presume that
both would be a storgē type of love, but a Stoic would argue that loving
something “right or wrong” applies differently to the two cases. Indeed, that
famous phrase has two sources, one derived from the other, that can be used to
see why the Stoics were correct in saying that some kinds of love—the important
ones—need to be squared with what is right, not just with our feelings about the
matter. The original attribution of the quote is to Stephen Decatur, a US naval
officer who allegedly said in an after-dinner toast in 1816: “Our Country! In her
intercourse with foreign nations may she always be in the right; but right or
wrong, our country!” Compare this with the derivative version, attributed to US
Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz, who used it in remarks before the Senate
on February 29, 1872: “My country, right or wrong; if right, to be kept right; and
if wrong, to be set right.”
I submit that the Decatur version is more appropriate for a sports team: “AS
Roma! In her intercourse with other teams may she always be victorious; but
winner or loser, AS Roma!” There is something charming in harmless loyalty to
a sports team, regardless, and in fact especially, if they tend to be on the losing
side. But blind allegiance to your country can be—and historically has been,
countless times—extremely dangerous. Indeed, I’m not aware of whether Schurz

ever read Epictetus, but the US secretary essentially made the same point the
philosopher did with the story of the distraught father: yes, it is understandable,
and even commendable, to have certain natural feelings for our offspring or
country. But since we are talking about human beings and foreign policy,
respectively, not about sports teams, reason ought to be called in to guide us in
our actions: I may feel like fleeing the house because I can’t bear to see my
daughter in pain, but the right thing to do is to stand by her and support her. I
may feel like my country is a crucial part of my identity, which therefore justifies
my having special regard for it, but if it is about to engage in actions that are
deleterious to itself or to others, then I have a duty to speak out. If something
really matters, feelings and reason cannot be decoupled and the latter promptly
ignored.

SINCE FRIENDSHIP IS A TYPE OF LOVE, ACCORDING TO THE Greco-Romans, it is
natural that it receives the same Stoic treatment from Epictetus as family
relations:
For where else is friendship but where faith and honour are, where men
give and take what is good, and nothing else? “But he has paid me
attention all this time: did he not love me?” How do you know, slave,
whether he has paid you this attention, as a man cleans his boots, or tends
his beast? How do you know whether, when you have lost your use as a
paltry vessel, he will not throw you away like a broken plate?… Were not
Eteocles and Polynices born of the same mother and the same father?
Were they not reared together, did they not live together, drink together,
sleep together, often kiss one another, so that if one had seen them he
would, no doubt, have laughed at the paradoxes of philosophers on
friendship. Yet when the bit of meat, in the shape of a king’s throne, fell
between them, see what they say:
E. Where wilt stand upon the tower?
P. Wherefore dost thou ask me this?
E. I will face thee then and slay thee.
P. I desire thy blood no less.
—EURIPIDES, THE PHOENISSAE, 621

Okay, the Master went poetic on me, and besides, Eteocles and Polynices
were brothers, not just friends, but his point is well taken: true friendship, like
true love, is revealed when the going gets tough, not when things are nice and
easy.
From a Stoic perspective, friendship, like everything else except our own
moral character, is a preferred indifferent. This raises interesting questions, since
it means, for instance, that there cannot be any such thing as (Stoic) friendship
between criminals, if “criminal” refers not just to someone wanted by the law
(after all, Nelson Mandela was a criminal from the point of view of the South
African apartheid government), but to a person who engages in despicable acts
of violence or thievery. This is true not only because it is rather difficult to
imagine a virtuous criminal, but also because every time a criminal helps his
criminal friend with, say, getting away with escaping justice, he puts his
friendship for the other ahead of moral integrity—precisely the reverse of the
Stoic set of priorities.
The same problem applies to love, both toward our relatives and toward our
companion. The world’s literature (including Greco-Roman literature) is full of
stories of people putting love above everything else, leading on occasion to
rather nasty consequences for themselves, the other person, or innocent third
parties. But we are often encouraged to admire these individuals, because, after
all, “love conquers all.” Besides the fact that “love conquers all” only in a highly
Disneyfied world, the Stoics would simply say that those are not cases of true
friendship or true love, precisely because they show “friendship” and “love”
trumping a person’s moral character. We have already encountered Medea, who,
before she went completely mad and killed her own children in revenge against
her unfaithful husband, Jason, betrayed her father and killed her brother in order
to help Jason steal the legendary Golden Fleece—allegedly, out of love for him.
According to the Stoics, whatever it was that Medea felt for Jason, that
sentiment wasn’t really love. And neither is what is often labeled the same way
in plenty of contemporary everyday news stories that are just as horrifying as the
ancient tale of Medea.
Now, one could reasonably suspect that the Stoics were up to semantic tricks
when they maintained that what many people consider friendship or love are in
fact no such thing. But that would be to miss the point: the Stoics were both keen
observers of human psychology (a descriptive activity) and sophisticated
thinkers about human morality (a prescriptive activity). They would have easily

granted that Medea felt what is commonly described as “love” toward Jason, or
that, say, two Mafia bosses may be “friends” according to standard parlance. But
they would have added, on the strength of their understanding of ethics, that
these are the wrong words to describe what is going on in these cases. Why does
this matter? Because if we use “love” and “friendship” to describe both
situations in which morality is trumped and situations in which it is central, then
we confuse things by not making semantic distinctions where there are
substantive differences. “It’s just semantics” is a weird dismissal of sometimes
necessary clarifications of language, because our ability to communicate with
and understand each other depends on semantics—that is, on our accurate use of
language.
Let me give you an example from Aristotle, who was definitely not a Stoic.
(Seneca, certainly a Stoic, used to help himself to the thoughts of the rival school
of Epicurus, arguing that truth is the property of everyone, regardless of where it
comes from, so I’m simply following his lead here.) Aristotle was arguably a bit
obsessed with taxonomies; for instance, he proposed a whopping twelve
different types of virtue rather than the Stoics’ simple four, even though all types
of virtue are really just different aspects of wisdom. When it comes to friendship,
Aristotle focused in particular on philía, which, we have seen, refers to relations
not just with those whom we today would call friends but also with close family
—that’s why it’s not strange that Epictetus brings up the story of the brothers
Eteocles and Polynices in his discussion of friendship. Aristotle distinguished
among three types of friendship that I think still provide a useful framework
today: friendship of utility, friendship of pleasure, and friendship of the good.
A friendship of utility is what we nowadays would call an acquaintance based
on reciprocal advantage—say, for instance, your relationship with your favorite
hairdresser. My mother used to run such a shop for many years in Rome, and it
was clear from even a casual observation that her relationship with her clients
was not just one of business. These women spent a significant amount of time,
over prolonged periods of their lives, having their hair or other aesthetic work,
like nails and such, done by my mother and her assistants. While the work was
professionally attended to, there was much talk about all sorts of things, ranging
from personal affairs to politics. (I don’t remember much philosophy being
discussed, though.) This certainly didn’t make my mother a “friend” of the
women in her parlor in the strict sense of the term, but it did make her more than
just an anonymous person with whom they simply made business transactions.
The ancients’ idea was a good one: even though the relationship is largely

established on mutual practical benefit and may terminate as soon as such
benefit is exhausted, we still want to behave cordially and have positive social
intercourse with other human beings, since it is the right and pleasurable thing to
do—right because we are treating others as ends in themselves, not just as means
to our ends, as Kant would have put it; and pleasurable because we are by nature
social beings who derive satisfaction from talking to other social beings.
A “friendship of pleasure,” the second Aristotelian category of philía, is
rather obviously based on (again, reciprocal) pleasure. Think of your drinking
buddies, or people with whom you share a hobby. Like friendship of utility, this
one too is based on mutual advantage, only this time the advantage is not
instrumental but pleasurable. Just as with friendships of utility, friendships of
pleasure don’t need to be deep, though in modern English usage we would
probably deploy the word “friend” rather than “acquaintance” in these cases.
And of course, like friendships of utility, friendships of pleasure may also end
once the pertinent social glue dissolves—for instance, because we lose interest in
a particular hobby, or discover a new watering hole in a different part of town.
The third category of Aristotelian friendship goes well beyond the minimal
requirements that most people would expect to be met before calling someone a
friend: a friendship of the good is that rare phenomenon when two people enjoy
each other for their own sake because they find in each other an affinity of
character that does not require externalities like a business exchange or a hobby.
In those cases, our friends become, as Aristotle famously put it, mirrors to our
souls, helping us grow and become better persons just because they care about
us. Again, you can see why “friendship of the good” may refer not just to
friendships in the modern sense of the term but also to relationships with family
members or with our companion.
Once more, Aristotle was no Stoic, and the Stoics would have said that the
only friendship that truly deserves to be called a friendship is that of the good.
Crucially, however, they would not have denied either the existence or the
importance of the other two classes. But they would have confined them to the
category of “preferred indifferents”: things you may very well have and
cultivate, so long as they don’t interfere with your virtues and moral integrity.
It is noteworthy that the Greco-Roman categorizations of types of love and
friendship are not just much richer than our own, but also somewhat differently
organized conceptually: they associated aspects of relationships that we keep
distinct, as when we differentiate “friends” (of one type) from family members
(of another type) from business acquaintances. In the end, concepts, and the

words that allow us to deploy them, are useful insofar as they help us navigate
the realities of our world, especially our social environment. But it will come as
no surprise to the reader that I admire the ancients’ rich vocabulary in this
respect and would suggest that perhaps we lost something significant when we
pared down our own language. After all, a meaningfully richer language reflects
a more nuanced thinking and a better ability to negotiate existence.

CHAPTER 14

PRACTICAL SPIRITUAL EXERCISES

Admit not sleep into your tender eyelids till you have reckoned up each
deed of the day—How have I erred, what done or left undone? So start,
and so review your acts, and then for vile deeds chide yourself, for good
be glad.
—EPICTETUS, DISCOURSES, III.10

WE HAVE TALKED ENOUGH WITH EPICTETUS, I THINK, TO have a good grasp of what
Stoicism is about, both in theory and as practically applied to everyday life,
whether in the Roman Empire in the second century BCE or now during the
twenty-first century. How, then, are we supposed to actually experience Stoicism
as a living philosophy?
There is no single way, nor is there a fixed set of doctrines resembling
anything like a religious catechism to go by—which I think is an unqualified
positive. But there are people—such as myself and the authors of a number of
other recent books on Stoicism—who have developed a practice based on a
combination of what is actually found in ancient texts, modern techniques
derived from cognitive behavioral and similar therapies, and just what does and
does not work for us individually. Different approaches to Stoicism work better
for different people, so it is best to treat the advice that follows as a set of
suggestions, not as rigid rules to stick to no matter what.
Naturally, I consulted Epictetus himself, and he directed me to his
Enchiridion, which literally means “handbook.” Of course, he didn’t write the
book (as far as we know, he didn’t write anything, really); the Enchiridion was
put together by Arrian of Nicomedia. Now, I’m not sure how comfortable I
would feel if my only legacy to humanity was a bunch of notes on my lectures
taken by one of my students, but some students are brighter than others, and at
any rate, this is what we have from Epictetus. Naturally, our legacy is yet another

thing we do not control, though we have control over how we interpret and use
someone else’s.
Then again, Arrian wasn’t just your average student, even for the times. He
became a well-known historian, a military commander, and a public servant of
the Roman Empire, being elected Consul in 130 CE, then Prefect of the Province
of Cappadocia. Arrian probably attended Epictetus’s school between 117 and
120 CE, then remained attached to his Master in Nicopolis for a while. Arrian
eventually left for Athens, and subsequently embarked on a distinguished career,
which included being appointed senator by Emperor Hadrian. When he retired,
Arrian went back to Athens, where he became Archon, or chief magistrate
(apparently he couldn’t just stand still and do nothing). He died during the reign
of Marcus Aurelius, the Stoic emperor. The poet Lucian of Samosata wrote that
Arrian was “a Roman of the first rank with a life-long attachment to learning.”
Having notes on my lectures taken by that sort of student would, I think, be more
than acceptable.
I have gone through the Enchiridion, compiled by Arrian on the basis of
Epictetus’s lectures, and distilled twelve “spiritual exercises,” or Stoic reminders
of how to act in everyday life. The best way to begin using them, I think, would
be to attach to your calendar a handy list of them, in no particular order. (They
are presented here simply in the sequence in which they appear in the
Enchiridion.) These days there are plenty of apps for smart phones and the like
that will easily allow you to do this. Set up the list in such a way that you’ll be
reminded of one of these practices every day, in rotation (or, to make things
more interesting, at random). Each day reread Epictetus’s words several times,
whenever you have a minute, and focus on putting into practice that day a
specific piece of advice. The first goal is to become mindful of the Stoic way to
think and—most importantly—act. Eventually, the exercises should become so
second nature that you won’t need the reminders (though I still have them pop
up on my calendar, just in case) and will be able to practice them spontaneously,
applying them to all the small and big events and situations of your life.
The exercises that follow naturally make the most sense when understood
through the lens of Stoic philosophy. So before discussing the exercises
themselves, let me recap some of the fundamental principles of Stoicism we
have learned throughout the book.
We have encountered a number of Stoic ideas during our conversations with
Epictetus, beginning most importantly with the three Stoic disciplines—desire,
action, and assent—and their relationship with the three areas of study—physics,

ethics, and logic—as discussed in Chapter 2. (This may be a good time to go
back to that discussion and refresh your understanding of these disciplines and
areas of study.) The disciplines have been the logical backbone for the entire
sequence of chapters in this book. Distilled to their bare minimum (in order to
derive the most benefit from these spiritual exercises), the Stoic principles are as
follows:
1. Virtue is the highest good, and everything else is indifferent. The Stoics got
the first part from Socrates, who argued that virtue is the chief good
because it is the only thing that is valuable under all circumstances and that
helps us make proper use of things like health, wealth, and education.
Everything else is indifferent in the specifically Stoic sense that nothing is
to be traded against virtue. The Stoic can pursue the preferred indifferents
and try to stay away from the dispreferred ones, so long as doing so doesn’t
interfere with virtue. In modern economic theory, this well-known approach
is called a system of lexicographic preferences. To illustrate, you have a
lexicographic preference if you wouldn’t trade your daughter for a
Lamborghini, no matter how much you’d love to have a Lamborghini.
2. Follow nature. That is, apply reason to social life. The Stoics thought that
we should take a hint from how the universe is put together in figuring out
how to live our lives. Since human beings are naturally social animals
capable of reason, it follows that we should strive to apply reason to
achieve a better society.
3. Dichotomy of control. Some things are under our control, and others are not
(though we may be able to influence them). If we are sufficiently healthy
mentally, our decisions and behaviors are under our control. Outside of our
control is everything else. We should concern ourselves with what is under
our control and handle everything else with equanimity.
Moreover, while engaging in the exercises proposed here, remember that they
are supposed to further your mastery of the four Stoic virtues:
(Practical) wisdom: Navigating complex situations in the best available
fashion
Courage: Doing the right thing, both physically and morally, under all

circumstances
Justice: Treating every human being—regardless of his or her stature in
life—with fairness and kindness
Temperance: Exercising moderation and self-control in all spheres of life
Now that we have reviewed the basic principles underlying the Stoic system,
we are better equipped to examine (and put into practice!) the twelve exercises I
extracted from Epictetus’s (well, actually, Arrian’s) Enchiridion:
1. Examine your impressions. “So make a practice at once of saying to
every strong impression: ‘An impression is all you are, not the source of the
impression.’ Then test and assess it with your criteria, but one primarily: ask, ‘Is
this something that is, or is not, in my control?’ And if it’s not one of the things
that you control, be ready with the reaction, ‘Then it’s none of my concern.’”
This is the classic dichotomy of control with which we began this book.
Epictetus exhorts us to practice what is arguably the most fundamental of his
doctrines: to constantly examine our “impressions”—that is, our initial reactions
to events, people, and what we are being told—by stepping back to make room
for rational deliberation, avoiding rash emotional reactions, and asking whether
whatever is being thrown at us is under our control (in which case we should act
on it) or isn’t (in which case we should regard it as not of our concern).
For instance, a few days before writing this I got food poisoning (from
spoiled fish) and experienced a pretty bad forty-eight hours, during which I
could hardly do anything interesting, let alone work and write. Ordinarily, this
would be something “bad,” an experience that most of us might be inclined to
complain about and seek sympathy for. The biochemistry of my body and of
potentially pathogenic agents, however, is most definitely not under my control
(though deciding to eat fish at that particular restaurant certainly was). So it
made no sense for me to complain about being sick with food poisoning, since I
could not change what had already happened. And though it is certainly human
to seek sympathy, even that response—from a Stoic perspective—is an
imposition on others in order to feel better ourselves, in a situation in which,
moreover, others cannot do much more than pity us. It is perfectly acceptable for
a Stoic to sympathize with others, but it seems a bit self-centered to require
sympathy from others when we are sick ourselves. Instead, I acted in accordance
with Epictetus’s words: I accepted what was happening as a fact of biology, took
the medical precautions that seemed to be in order (taking some probiotics), and
then adjusted my mental attitude to my predicament. I couldn’t work or write.

Well, then, I would not even try, since there were other things I could do instead,
and at any rate I was very likely to recover quickly, after which there would be
plenty of time to work and write.
One last comment here: the “it’s none of my concern” bit is often
misunderstood. The idea isn’t that we should not care about what is happening to
us. During my bout of food poisoning, for instance, I was forcefully reminded
that health is ranked by the Stoics as a preferred indifferent—something that is to
be sought unless it compromises our integrity and virtue. But if there truly is
nothing more to be done about a given situation, then we should no longer
“concern” ourselves with it—we should stop trying to do something about the
situation—precisely because it is outside of our control. Larry Becker calls this
the “axiom of futility,” which he spells out in rather crisp terms: “Agents are
required not to make direct attempts to do (or be) something that is logically,
theoretically, or practically impossible.” Wise words, it seems to me.
2. Remind yourself of the impermanence of things. “In the case of
particular things that delight you, or benefit you, or to which you have grown
attached, remind yourself of what they are. Start with things of little value. If it is
china you like, for instance, say, ‘I am fond of a piece of china.’ When it breaks,
then you won’t be as disconcerted. When giving your wife or child a kiss, repeat
to yourself, ‘I am kissing a mortal.’ Then you won’t be so distraught if they are
taken from you.”
This very famous passage from the Enchiridion shocks students when they
first hear it. It is one of the most misinterpreted bits of Stoic wisdom, sometimes
even willfully so. That is why it is all the more important that we understand it
properly. The troublesome part, of course, is not what Epictetus says about the
piece of china, but the part that follows concerning one’s wife or child. If
Epictetus had stopped at the first example, I think we would have all taken this
to be a reasonable reminder not to get attached to things, perhaps even a secondcentury warning against consumerism. (Consumerism is not a modern American
invention; there was plenty of it going around at the time of the Roman Empire
—for those, then as now of course, who could actually afford to consume.) The
second part, however, reveals a truly deep insight into the human condition, and
may require some background to be properly appreciated. After all, Stoicism
was thought of by its practitioners as a philosophy of love—not of callous
disregard for human beings and their sufferings.
First off, let’s remind ourselves of the historical context: Epictetus was
writing at a time when even emperors (like Marcus Aurelius himself) lost most

of their children and other loved ones at what we would consider a tender or
premature age, to disease, random violence, or war. While most of us in the West
and in a few other parts of the world are currently lucky in that respect
(especially if we happen to be white and male), it remains true today that life is
ephemeral, and people we deeply care about may be snatched from us suddenly
and without warning.
Second, and more crucially, what Epictetus is counseling here is not an
inhuman indifference toward our beloved ones, but quite the opposite: we should
constantly remind ourselves of just how precious our loved ones are precisely
because they may soon be gone. Anyone who has lost someone they were close
to ought to know exactly what this means. The idea is that we should go through
life just as the Roman generals did during official celebrations of their triumphs
in the Eternal City: with somebody constantly whispering in our ear, “Memento
homo” (Remember, you are only a man).
Forgive me if, again, I make this personal. I lost my mother to cancer at about
the time I was beginning to study Stoicism seriously. I had lost my father to the
same disease (and probably because of the same triggering factor, smoking) a
decade earlier. Both those losses affected me deeply, not because I had had an
idyllic relationship with either of my parents (I hadn’t, and instead feel most
indebted to my paternal grandmother and her partner, my adoptive grandfather,
with whom I grew up), but because they marked the passing of the very two
individuals who brought me into this world. Losing one’s parents is a rite of
passage for most of us (unless we happen to die before them), and anyone who
has gone through the experience will testify to how hard it is, regardless of the
specific circumstances. Yet I observed that the way I handled the illness and
subsequent death of each of my parents was very different in the two instances.
When my father was diagnosed with the first of what turned out to be a
number of distinct types of cancer, I simply did not take seriously the idea that I
was going to have only a few more chances to spend some time with him—not
only because of the suddenly shortened time horizon (he died at age sixty-nine),
but also because we were living almost 7,000 kilometers apart, he in Rome and I
in New York. I kept behaving as if we had all the time in the world and quite
simply refused to internalize what my mind knew very well: what was
happening was probably going to kill my father in a short time. It ended up
taking about five years, but I still managed to be caught unaware by his final
decline; as a result, I was not there when he finally died. (I was en route to the
New York airport to take the flight for Rome.)

I always regretted the way I responded to my father’s illness—until Stoicism
taught me that regret is about things we can no longer change and the right
attitude is to learn from our experiences, not dwell on decisions that we are not
in a position to alter. Which brings me to my mother. Her demise was actually
faster, and we didn’t even realize what was happening for a while because of an
initial misdiagnosis. But once the picture became clear, I was able to return to
Italy and visit her with full awareness—and acceptance—of what was going on.
Every time I left her at the hospital, after having kissed her good-bye, Epictetus’s
words rang comfortingly true. I really did not know whether I would see her the
following day. None of this made the experience any less hard, since Stoicism
isn’t a magic wand. But I tried my best to be present in the hic et nunc, the here
and now, as the Romans used to say. That mindfulness is what Epictetus is
attempting to instill in his students: far from counseling us not to care (despite
the “you won’t be so distraught” of the English translation, which inevitably
loses some of the poignancy of the original Greek), he is advising us to care and
appreciate very much what we now have, precisely because Fate may snatch it
from us tomorrow.
3. The reserve clause. “Whenever planning an action, mentally rehearse
what the plan entails. If you are heading out to bathe, picture to yourself the
typical scene at the bathhouse—people splashing, pushing, yelling and pinching
your clothes. You will complete the act with more composure if you say at the
outset, ‘I want a bath, but at the same time I want to keep my will aligned with
nature’ [that is, to apply reason to social living]. Do it with every act. That way if
something occurs to spoil your bath, you will have ready the thought, ‘Well, this
was not my only intention, I also meant to keep my will in line with nature—
which is impossible if I go all to pieces whenever anything bad happens.’”
I love the “which is impossible if I go all to pieces whenever anything bad
happens” bit. It conjures an image of people who are too fragile to withstand
even minor challenges in life because they let themselves be fragile. They
always assume that of course things will go well, since bad things only happen
to other people (possibly because they somehow deserve them). Instead, as
Stoics, we should bring the reserve clause to anything we do, and even use it as a
personal mantra: Fate permitting.
Notice again that Epictetus here begins with a very simple situation: he wants
to go to the baths and enjoy the experience. Just as we may want to go to the
movies, say, and be able to watch the film without the glare of cell phones being
lit up by obnoxious people who just have to check their messages one more time

or else. Here too I speak from personal experience of course: I used to get really
mad when this happened, and would occasionally engage the offender in a loud
argument that, predictably, went nowhere. These days I react by deploying two
of the Stoic techniques we have seen so far: First, of course, I think of the
dichotomy of control. Going to the movies is under my control (I could, after all,
watch another film at home or do something else entirely), and so is my reaction
to other people’s behaviors. And though the latter are certainly not under my
control, I can influence them: by politely explaining to another movie patron
why what he or she is doing is inconsiderate, or by going to the movie house’s
management and—again calmly and politely—complaining about the situation,
since it is their responsibility to ensure that paying customers have an enjoyable
experience while frequenting their establishment.
The second technique to deploy is the reserve clause, properly understood.
Once more, Epictetus is not counseling us to passively accept other people’s
rudeness, but rather reminding us that we may set out with a particular goal in
mind but that events may not go the way we wish. That being the case, our
choices are to make ourselves miserable, thereby willfully worsening our
situation, or to remember our overarching goal: to be a decent person who
doesn’t do anything that is unvirtuous or that may compromise our integrity (like
behaving obnoxiously in reaction to another’s obnoxious behavior).
There is a nice analogy in Stoic lore meant to explain the point. It is
attributed to Chrysippus—the third head of the original Stoa of Athens—and
was allegedly recounted in one of Epictetus’s lost volumes of the Discourses.
Imagine a dog who is leashed to a cart. The cart begins to move forward, in
whatever direction the driver, but certainly not the dog, chooses. Now, the leash
is long enough that the dog has two options: either he can gingerly follow the
general direction of the cart, over which he has no control, and thereby enjoy the
ride and even have time to explore his surroundings and attend to some of his
own business, or he can stubbornly resist the cart with all his might and end up
being dragged, kicking and screaming, for the rest of the trip, accumulating
much pain and frustration and wasting his time in a futile and decidedly
unpleasant effort. We humans are, of course, the dog: the universe keeps
churning according to God’s will (if you have religious inclinations) or cosmic
cause and effect (if your taste is more secular). But you do have some room to
maneuver, while you are alive and well, and can choose to enjoy the ride, even
as you remain aware of the constraints you have and know that whatever you
wish to accomplish always comes with a big caveat: Fate (the cart driver, God,

the universe) permitting. This is what it means to do whatever you do while
“keeping in line with nature.”
There is yet another way to interpret the message of this exercise, and I thank
my friend Bill Irvine for expressing it particularly clearly in his book A Guide to
the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy. Let’s suppose that you are playing a
tennis match or, more consequentially, being considered for a promotion at your
job. The Stoic approach to both situations is the one counseled by Epictetus, and
one that Bill reinterprets as internalizing your goals. While we naturally think
that our goal is to win the match, or get the promotion, those outcomes of course
are not in our control—they can only be influenced by us. So we need to make
our goal something that actually is in our power and not even Fate can rob us of:
to play the best match we can, regardless of outcome, or to put together the best
promotion file we can before the decision is made. By now I should not need to
add the usual caveat, but repetita iuvant (repetition is helpful), as the Romans
said: the idea is not to passively accept defeat in the tennis match, or perhaps
absorb the injustice of not getting a promotion that was richly deserved. Rather,
it is to deploy the wisdom that sometimes things will not go our way even if we
do our best, and regardless of whether we deserved to win the match or get the
promotion. Not to confuse one’s aspirations, even well-grounded ones, with how
the universe will (or ought to) act is one of the hallmarks of a wise person.
4. How can I use virtue here and now? “For every challenge, remember the
resources you have within you to cope with it. Provoked by the sight of a
handsome man or a beautiful woman, you will discover within you the contrary
power of self-restraint. Faced with pain, you will discover the power of
endurance. If you are insulted, you will discover patience. In time, you will grow
to be confident that there is not a single impression that you will not have the
moral means to tolerate.”
I think of this passage as one of the most empowering of Stoic writings.
Epictetus, the former slave, lame because of a once-broken leg, tells us to use
every occasion, every challenge, as a way to exercise our virtue, to become a
better human being by constant application. Notice how he counters each
temptation or difficulty with a virtue that can be practiced, deploying the Stoic
concept that every challenge in life is a perfectly good chance to work on selfimprovement. When you see an attractive person walking by, you will not
scheme to get that person in bed with you, unless both of you happen to be free
from other relationships and pursuing your desires is not going to cause pain and
suffering to others. Rather, you will summon your self-control and focus on how

you can alter your own mentality so that eventually you will simply not feel the
temptation at all. The second example is of a different kind, and yet it evokes the
same response in a Stoic, with a similar result: you cannot control disease and
pain, and it will happen at some point or another in your life. But you can
manage it, not just with medications (there is certainly nothing in Stoic doctrine
that precludes the use of medicine when appropriate), but also by way of your
own mental attitude. No wonder Epictetus is often associated with the phrase
“bear and forbear,” or “endure and renounce.” But remember that the goal isn’t
to live an unhappy and grim life. On the contrary, it is to achieve what the Stoics
called apatheia, which, despite the obvious and unappealing English echo, we
have seen means tranquillity of mind, as well as equanimity toward whatever life
happens to throw at us.
Here again, perhaps a personal anecdote will help. Not long ago I was home
alone and preparing myself dinner, engaged in slicing an onion to sauté in
preparation for a nice pasta meal. Unfortunately, the knife was rather blunt, it
slipped, and I cut my left ring finger—deeply cut, as in, I had to hold it to
prevent it from falling off. (At the moment of this writing, more than a year later,
I still haven’t completely regained sensation in that finger.) I distinctly remember
automatically switching to an attitude that I probably would not have had a few
years ago. I looked at what I had done, took the obvious precaution of holding
the partly severed digit with my other hand, and then quickly decided that it
wasn’t going to be a good idea to wipe the blood off and that I should simply get
out and walk to the nearby medical emergency facility to have them take care of
my finger as best they could. On my way there I kept engaging in premeditatio
malorum (foreseeing bad things): what was the worst thing that could happen,
and how would I deal with it? I’m no medical doctor, but as far as I could tell,
the worst-case scenario was going to involve a significant amount of pain, the
loss of a bit of blood, and possibly the permanent loss of part of the finger. Well,
that wasn’t too bad, was it? I’m not a pianist, I’m pretty fast at typing my essays
using mostly just two fingers, and such an outcome wouldn’t change my
appearance enough to create problems with my dating life. I could cope with it, I
decided. And I did. Then things turned out significantly better than my
premeditatio scenario allowed: I still have the full finger, and I even use it
occasionally to help with the typing. My romantic life wasn’t affected either, I’m
happy to report.
5. Pause and take a deep breath. “Remember, it is not enough to be hit or
insulted to be harmed, you must believe that you are being harmed. If someone

succeeds in provoking you, realize that your mind is complicit in the
provocation. Which is why it is essential that we not respond impulsively to
impressions; take a moment before reacting, and you will find it is easier to
maintain control.”
As we have seen, Stoics handled insults very well, ideally like rocks. (Have
you ever tried to insult a rock? How did it go?) Those who felt so inclined also
responded with a sense of humor. The point here, however, is to practice the
crucial step that allows us to more rationally examine our impressions,
regardless of whether they are negative, such as insults, or positive such as
feelings of lust: we need to resist the impulse to react immediately and
instinctively to potentially problematic situations. Instead, we must pause, take a
deep breath, perhaps go for a walk around the block, and only then consider the
issue as dispassionately (in the sense of equanimity, not lack of care) as possible.
This is simple advice, and yet it is very difficult to pull off. It is also very, very
important. Once you start seriously practicing this exercise, you will see
dramatic improvements in the way you handle things, and you’ll get positive
feedback from all the others who also see those improvements. I cannot even
count, at this point, the number of occasions when doing what Epictetus says
here saved a situation in my life and improved my mood.
You know the famous Nike commercial slogan, “Just Do It”? Well no, the
Stoics disagree. If it is important, you really ought to stop and think about it
before you decide whether to do it. Imagine how much less pain you would have
inflicted on others, how many difficult or embarrassing situations you would
have avoided, and just generally how much more self-confident and positive you
would have felt if you had started doing this years ago. As our friend Epictetus
puts it, “[The next time] you encounter anything troublesome or pleasant or
glorious or inglorious, remember that the hour of struggle is come, the Olympic
contest is here and you may put it off no longer, and that one day and one action
determines whether the progress you have achieved is lost or maintained.” The
Olympic games of life have already started, and even if you did not join before,
the time to join is now, not tomorrow.
6. Other-ize. “We can familiarize ourselves with the will of nature by calling
to mind our common experiences. When a friend breaks a glass, we are quick to
say, ‘Oh, bad luck.’ It’s only reasonable, then, that when a glass of your own
breaks, you accept it in the same patient spirit. Moving on to graver things: when
somebody’s wife or child dies, to a man we all routinely say, ‘Well, that’s part of
life.’ But if one of our own family is involved, then right away it’s ‘Poor, poor

me!’ We would do better to remember how we react when a similar loss afflicts
others.”
This exercise is a fascinating one: Epictetus reminds us here of just how
differently we regard an event that has affected other people when the same
event affects us. Naturally, it is far easier to maintain equanimity (which, again,
is not to be confused with emotional impassivity!) when little inconveniences, or
even disasters, happen to others rather than to ourselves. But why, really? What
makes us think that we are the universe’s special darlings, or that we ought to
be?
Of course, even if we can bring ourselves to realize and internalize (which is
far more difficult) that we are just like everyone else on the planet and should
have the same attitude about an occurrence when it happens to others as when it
happens to ourselves, we could still flip the argument on the Stoic and say that
the right thing to do is to feel the same degree of pain and empathy for
everyone’s misfortunes as we do for our own. The Stoic has two responses to
this argument—one based on empirical evidence, and the other from
philosophical principles. The empirical fact is that human beings are simply
incapable, physiologically, of that much empathy. To feel truly sorry and
distraught for every life lost on planet Earth as we normally feel when our own
loved ones die is, simply put, inhuman. The philosophical argument is that we
are, if not entirely right, at least closer to the truth when we say to other people,
“I’m truly sorry, but it is a fact of life,” than when we tell ourselves, “Poor me!
Poor me!” Accidents, injuries, disease, and death are unavoidable, and while it is
understandable to be distraught over them (presumably in proportion to their
gravity—breaking a glass is not the same thing as losing one’s spouse!), we can
take comfort in knowing that they are in the normal order of things. The universe
isn’t after anyone—or at least, it isn’t after any one of us in particular!
I found both interpretations of the “other-ize” exercise useful in a number of
recent experiences. Sometimes I tend to dismiss the feelings of people who are
close to me on the grounds that they are overreacting to whatever is happening to
them. But Epictetus reminds me that I tend to feel differently when similar
things—like a cutting comment from a friend or a colleague—happen to me. By
the same token, when it is my turn to be on the receiving end, I now instantly
recall that pretty much everyone I know has experienced whatever it is that is
upsetting me at the moment, or will experience it at some point in their lives.
This constant habit of adjusting my own reactions to others’ misfortunes and
putting my problems in context by remembering that they are common to the

broader humanity is—I think—gradually helping me see things with an
equanimity that I definitely lacked before I got interested in Stoicism.
7. Speak little and well. “Let silence be your goal for the most part; say only
what is necessary, and be brief about it. On the rare occasions when you’re
called upon to speak, then speak, but never about banalities like gladiators,
horses, sports, food and drink—common-place stuff. Above all don’t gossip
about people, praising, blaming or comparing them.”
I must admit that this is a hard one for me to practice, probably owing to my
somewhat above-average ego and the professional habits of a teacher who is far
too often in professorial mode. Still, I’ve tried to remember this counsel and take
it to heart, and it is serving me increasingly well. Very few people wish to be
lectured over dinner or on a social occasion. Come to think of it, probably very
few people want to be lectured under any circumstances at all! So one side effect
of this exercise is that it will probably make you more welcomed regardless of
the occasion.
On closer inspection, Epictetus’s list of things not to talk about is revealing in
and of itself. We may not talk much these days about gladiators, but we do talk
about star athletes, movie and music stars, and other “celebrities” (which, as a
song from the musical Chicago aptly explains, means “to be famous for being
famous”). Why should we refrain from such talk, or at least indulge in it as little
as possible? Because it is fundamentally empty. Why should we care at all about
what the Kardashians (or any other celebrities of the moment) are doing? To say
that an interest in such matters is the hallmark of a rather shallow mind sounds
elitist of course, and therefore distasteful to our modern sensibilities, but only
because we have been conditioned to think that “serious” talk is boring and at
any rate requires more background knowledge and attention than most of us
associate with good conversation. This, however, has most definitely not always
been true. Those who frequented ancient Greek symposia or their Roman
equivalent, the convivium (which means “living together”), thought that a good
dinner party hinged on involved discussions of philosophy, politics, and other
“serious” matters. To make the discussion flow better, both the Greeks and the
Romans served light wine and snacks. During the Enlightenment, private
“salons” sprang up throughout Europe, and people competed to be invited to join
in the salon conversations, with very few reports of ensuing boredom.
Epictetus’s second list—the items of conversation we should stay away from
“above all”—concerns gossip and judgments of people. This list requires some
further discussion. Gossiping probably evolved over time as a way for people to

“keep track,” so to speak, of members of their tribe, which is very helpful when
your survival depends on the trustworthiness (or not) of those around you.
Although even in modern society we need to appraise the people with whom we
interact in order to decide whether we can rely on them as life partners, friends,
business associates, coworkers, and so forth, this is probably best done directly,
in person, based on what the people in question actually say and—especially—
on what they do. To indulge in gossip and judge people who are not present to
defend themselves simply does not seem to be the virtuous thing to do, and the
Stoic idea is that we debase ourselves whenever we engage in such activity.
An important part of what Epictetus is suggesting here builds on the general
Stoic principle that we can decide on our best course of action and then redirect
our behavior accordingly. Initially, this is difficult, and even feels unnatural, but
then habit kicks in and redirecting our behavior becomes easier and easier—until
we reach the point where we wonder how we could have ever behaved
otherwise. So I don’t suggest that you suddenly and drastically change your
demeanor at social events. But give it a try and see how it fits you. Begin by
responding less and less to talk of “gladiators” and such and occasionally
introduce a more challenging topic of your own that is based on something
you’ve recently read or watched and that you feel might lead to a mutually
beneficial conversation with your friends. See what happens! I’m still surprised
at how much more I enjoy dinner parties now.
8. Choose your company well. “Avoid fraternizing with non-philosophers. If
you must, though, be careful not to sink to their level; because, you know, if a
companion is dirty, his friends cannot help but get a little dirty too, no matter
how clean they started out.”
I laugh every time I read this, since it is yet another example of Stoic, shall
we say, bluntness; it is bound to shock modern sensibilities, and yet, the more I
reflect on it, the more I become convinced that modern sensibilities could benefit
from the occasional shock. Indeed, to our ears this sort of advice sounds (again!)
insufferably elitist, but only a moment’s reflection reveals that it is not. First of
all, remember the source: it comes from an ex-slave who was making a living
teaching in the open air, not from a stuffy aristocrat living in a semi-secluded
Roman version of a McMansion or a gated community. Second, realize that by
“philosophers” Epictetus doesn’t mean professional academics (trust me, you
don’t want to make a habit of socializing mostly with them), but rather people
who are interested in following virtue and cultivating their character. From the
ancient perspective, which we would do well to make our own, everyone ought

to strive to be a philosopher in this sense of the term—that is, to apply reason to
improve his own and his community’s life and well-being. Even more generally,
this is simply the sound advice that our life is short, temptation and waste are
always lurking, and so we need to pay attention to what we are doing and who
our companions are.
Again, I have tried to slowly implement this strategy in my own social
interactions—it goes very well with the previous exercise of engaging in less and
more meaningful conversation. I don’t mean simply that I have cleaned up the
roster of my Facebook “friends” (although I have done that too), but that I truly
pay attention to whom I spend my time with and why. Ideally, remember how
Aristotle (not a Stoic!) put it: we want to be with friends who are better than
ourselves, so that we can learn from them. At the very least, we want our friends
to be the sort of people who can hold up a mirror to our soul, so that we can look
into it frankly and gain a better idea of just how much work needs to be done on
it (the soul, not the mirror).
9. Respond to insults with humor. “If you learn that someone is speaking ill
of you, don’t try to defend yourself against the rumors; respond instead with,
‘Yes, and he doesn’t know the half of it, because he could have said more.’”
This is a lovely example of profound wisdom accompanied by Epictetus’s
own distinctive brand of humor: instead of getting offended by someone’s insults
(remember, what they say is not yours to control), respond with self-deprecation.
You will feel better, and your vilifier will be embarrassed, or at the least
disarmed. The already mentioned Bill Irvine has worked this advice into an art
form. He tells the story of a colleague in his department who once stopped him
in the middle of the hall to say, “I was just trying to decide whether to cite your
work in my next paper.” At first Bill was delighted, thinking that one of his own
colleagues actually appreciated his technical work (believe me, it doesn’t happen
as often as you might think, especially in philosophy departments), but the
colleague immediately went on: “Yes, but I can’t decide if what you wrote is just
misguided or downright evil.” Now, most of us would be quite offended by that
sort of comment, which may have been meant as either an “observation” without
malice (academics have a not entirely undeserved reputation for being, shall we
say, socially unaware) or in fact an intentional put-down. Rather than defend
himself from the charge and launch into a detailed, and probably useless,
explanation of why his paper was neither evil nor misguided, Bill did the Stoic
thing: he took a breath, smiled, and replied: “Well, good thing you haven’t read
my other works, or you’d see just how evil and misguided I really am.”

I’m sure the reader will have no trouble believing that this is advice that I
have also tried, if imperfectly, to put into practice. Doing so has made a
significant difference in the way I relate to others, especially hostile others. In
my younger days, I was far more insecure and prone to take offense, sometimes
brooding for hours, or even losing sleep, over what I perceived as an insult,
especially if it had come from someone I admired or regarded as a friend. No
more. Now I follow Bill and actually relish the occasions on which I receive
insults (which are fairly rare, I must say).
The best arena to practice what he calls “insult pacifism” is, of course, the
Internet. I maintain an active set of social networks for professional and outreach
work, not to mention two blogs, and as I’m sure is common experience, that
provides highly fertile ground for trolling, grandstanding, and general rudeness. I
therefore had to set ground rules for my readers and followers—as well as for
myself—very early on in the game, before I got interested in Stoicism. Since
then, meeting insults with humor has most definitely made my virtual life a far
more pleasant experience. First, however, I follow Epictetus’s previous advice
about speaking little and to the point: I simply do not respond or engage as much
as I did before, while increasing the time I spend just listening. More
importantly, I have begun to internalize the concept that an insult works, not
because it is intended as such by the person who delivers it, but because the
target allows it to become an insult.
There are two important caveats to discuss concerning this exercise. First and
foremost, this shouldn’t be taken as a backhanded way to ignore the serious
problem of bullying, of both the cyber and in-person varieties. Bullying is a
behavior that is not acceptable and ought to be nipped in the bud, especially
when aimed—as it often is—at minors or at people who suffer from
psychological issues that make them particularly susceptible to it. But this is true
in general of a lot of what the Stoics advise: the two approaches—working on
eliminating or curtailing a problem while at the same time developing one’s own
endurance—are simply not mutually exclusive. As a matter of fact, not only is
there no need to choose one strategy or the other, but they can be reciprocally
reinforcing. The more you train yourself to endure insults the stronger you feel
psychologically, and therefore the more you can react appropriately and
effectively, and vice versa: taking a stance against bullying enables you to see it
for the infantile attitude that it really is (even, or especially, when engaged in by
“adults”), and this insight then leads to the fostering of greater resilience.
The second caveat stems from an objection I often hear whenever this

particular Stoic advice is discussed: perhaps, the argument goes, what you
perceive as an insult is only meant as a criticism, even a constructive one. By
ignoring it or not taking it seriously, you may miss out on a chance at selfimprovement and even come across as arrogant.
In response, we have to remember that one of the four cardinal Stoic virtues
is wisdom, the practice of which makes it easier for us to distinguish criticism
from insult. Often the distinction is so clear that you don’t have to be a Sage to
see it. Even so, it is always worth asking yourself a number of questions when
you are on the receiving end of what feels like an insult. Is this person a friend or
someone you look up to? If yes, then it is more likely that she is just offering
advice, perhaps in a somewhat pointed fashion, but with good intentions
nonetheless. Even if the person is not likely to be friendly or particularly well
positioned to provide you with constructive and useful counsel, perhaps she is
seeing something that you don’t? In that case too, it is worth ignoring the cutting
aspect of what she is saying in order to focus on what it is that she may have
gotten right and that may have eluded you. There is no reason at all why insults,
even when meant as such, cannot also be teaching moments for us.
10. Don’t speak too much about yourself. “In your conversation, don’t
dwell at excessive length on your own deeds or adventures. Just because you
enjoy recounting your exploits doesn’t mean that others derive the same pleasure
from hearing about them.”
I must admit to often failing to follow this advice (see “ego” and
“professorial mode” above), but I keep trying. When I do succeed at it, however,
not only do I feel good, but I enjoy my social life more. It feels good because, as
we have seen with a number of the other exercises—and indeed as the Stoics
themselves clearly recognized—there is a peculiar pleasure in being able to
exercise some self-control. I can perhaps explain better by making an analogy to
going to the gym. I don’t know about you, but when I get to my local gym and
someone from behind the reception desk smiles and greets me with a loud and
cheerful, “Enjoy your workout!” the first thought that comes to my mind is: Who
on earth enjoys working out? Yes, I know, some people actually do enjoy it, but
most of us don’t. And yet, it is the sort of thing we do because we have reflected
on the benefits of doing it and decided that the gain is worth the pain, as they
say. But it is also the case that once we get to the end of the workout and head to
the shower, we feel a peculiar sort of satisfaction, not only from the
physiological benefits of the exercise but also from being able to pat ourselves
on the back and say: it was hard, we didn’t really want to do it, but we did it!

As for the positive social benefits of this particular spiritual exercise, I think
they are obvious: just as no one wants to sit through a slide show from your
latest vacation (even when presented as tiny pictures on your latest shining
iPhone), no one really wants to hear another person going on and on about
himself. It is pretty safe to say that we are not as interesting as we think we are.
So trust me (and Epictetus): being a bit more cognizant of that basic truth of
social interaction and trying a little harder to take it into account will only make
your friends and acquaintances happier.
11. Speak without judging. “Someone bathes in haste; don’t say he bathes
badly, but in haste. Someone drinks a lot of wine; don’t say he drinks badly, but
a lot. Until you know their reasons, how do you know that their actions are
vicious? This will save you from perceiving one thing clearly, but then assenting
to something different.”
I’m still working on this one too, I’m afraid. But again, Epictetus’s advice is
so useful, and so typically Stoic. The idea is to distinguish between matters of
fact—to which we can assent if we find them justified by observation—and
judgments, from which we generally ought to abstain, since we usually don’t
have sufficient information.
As we all know, pretty much every day presents us with countless occasions
to practice this exercise. Has a friend of yours let himself go in terms of physical
appearance? Try to simply describe the fact to yourself, rather than construct a
judgment. Then ask yourself why that might have happened. Did your friend
want to become less attractive or physically fit? Probably not. What were the
deeper causes then? And rather than judging the outcome, can you help him
instead of sitting there and criticizing him? Or perhaps a coworker has snapped
at you, or at someone else. Rather than hurling (or mumbling to yourself) what
you think might be an “appropriate” epithet, ask yourself: Have I ever snapped at
anyone? Yes of course. And when I did so, was it really enjoyable to treat
someone like crap? Or were there deeper and not very obvious reasons why I
snapped against my better judgment? And how would I have liked others to
regard my outburst—what would I have wanted them to do about it? Now make
an effort to reverse the situation and see if you can practice Epictetus’s advice in
the presence of your irritable coworker.
Just pause for a moment and try to imagine how much better the world would
be if we all refrained from hasty judgments and looked at human affairs matterof-factly, with a bit more compassion for our fellow human beings.
12. Reflect on your day. “Admit not sleep into your tender eyelids till you

have reckoned up each deed of the day—How have I erred, what done or left
undone? So start, and so review your acts, and then for vile deeds chide yourself,
for good be glad.”
This last exercise comes from the Discourses, not the Enchiridion (and in
fact, we have already encountered it), but I think it is crucial and include it here
because I have found it extremely beneficial myself. Seneca advises us to do
something very similar, and he specifically says that it is best to do it in the
evening but before going to bed, because when we are already in bed we tend to
become groggy and lose concentration. Find a quiet place in your house or
apartment (I can manage that even in the minimalist spaces most people can
afford in New York!) and reflect on what has happened during the day. I find it
useful to write down my reflections, as Marcus Aurelius did with his
“meditations.”
The goal is to focus on the important happenings of the day, particularly
those that have ethical valence. Perhaps I had a bruising interaction with a
colleague today, or didn’t treat my partner as well as I should have. Then again,
maybe I was magnanimous to a student, or helpful to a friend. For each of these
types of occurrences, I write a couple of lines in my philosophical diary, add as
dispassionate a comment as I can muster—as if I were grading my own ethical
performance that day—and make a mental note of what I have learned from my
experiences. On this point I honestly can do no better than to give you a small
taste of Seneca himself, arguably the most compelling and elegant of the Stoic
writers:
The spirit ought to be brought up for examination daily. It was the custom
of Sextius when the day was over, and he had betaken himself to rest, to
inquire of his spirit: “What bad habit of yours have you cured to-day?
What vice have you checked? In what respect are you better?” Anger will
cease, and become more gentle, if it knows that every day it will have to
appear before the judgment seat. What can be more admirable than this
fashion of discussing the whole of the day’s events? How sweet is the
sleep which follows this self-examination? How calm, how sound, and
careless is it when our spirit has either received praise or reprimand, and
when our secret inquisitor and censor has made his report about our
morals? I make use of this privilege, and daily plead my cause before
myself: when the lamp is taken out of my sight, and my wife, who knows
my habit, has ceased to talk, I pass the whole day in review before myself,

and repeat all that I have said and done: I conceal nothing from myself,
and omit nothing: for why should I be afraid of any of my shortcomings,
when it is in my power to say, “I pardon you this time: see that you never
do that anymore”?… A good man delights in receiving advice: all the
worst men are the most impatient of guidance.

APPENDIX

THE HELLENISTIC SCHOOLS OF PRACTICAL PHILOSOPHY

Wonder is the feeling of a philosopher, and philosophy begins in wonder.
—PLATO, THEAETETUS, 155

THROUGHOUT THIS BOOK WE HAVE TALKED ABOUT ETHICS, specifically from the
point of view of the Stoics. Ethics, of course, is one of the classical branches of
philosophy, the other ones being aesthetics (concerned with beauty and art),
epistemology (the study of how we know things), logic (dedicated to
understanding reason), and metaphysics (to comprehend the nature of the world).
But as we saw at the beginning of the book, “ethics” has a different meaning
today than it did for the ancient Greco-Romans, and of course the Stoics’ wasn’t
the only approach to its study. While modern ethics is essentially concerned with
which actions are right or wrong, premodern philosophers conceived of ethics as
the much broader inquiry into how to live a happy life, the pursuit of which they
deemed to be a human being’s most important endeavor. But a happy life can be
pursued in different ways, depending on which concept of eudaimonia—the
flourishing life—one adopts. The major Hellenistic schools of philosophy
differed primarily on just this point, and it is useful to get a sense of what the
alternatives to Stoicism were—and still are. After all, together with A Guide to
the Good Life’s author Bill Irvine, I believe that adopting and adapting a
philosophy of life to guide you is more important than whichever specific
philosophy you end up choosing.
True, there are some pretty awful “philosophies” out there that are not
conducive to human flourishing. But there are also several alternatives that may
make more sense to you personally—I don’t want to leave you with the incorrect
impression that it’s Stoicism or bust! I will not discuss the variety of life
philosophies that arose within the Eastern tradition—Buddhism, Taoism,
Confucianism, and the like—because I simply don’t know enough about them,

and because there are already plenty of excellent resources out there that the
interested reader can make use of. Here it will be instructive to take a quick look
at those that came out of the Western tradition in the Hellenistic period, before
the rise of Christianity. What follows is a simplified genealogical tree of the
major Hellenistic schools that either focused on or had a lot to say about the
good life.
As you can see, it all began with Socrates. Stemming from different
interpretations of his teachings, a trio of schools arose: Plato’s Academy,
Aristippus’s Cyrenaics, and Antisthenes’s Cynicism. Aristotelianism originated
from within the Academy (which Aristotle frequented), Cyrenaism led to
Epicureanism, and Cynicism birthed Stoicism—although the actual relationships
among all these schools are best thought of as many-to-many rather than in
terms of linear descent, given the reciprocal influences that took place over
centuries. Let’s take a brief look at each—who knows, it may turn out that after
having learned this much about Stoicism you are really a Cynic or, Zeus forbid,
an Epicurean!

FIGURE A.1. The historical and conceptual
relationships among the main Hellenistic
schools of philosophy and how they
diverged from the thinking of Socrates.
Source: After Figure 1 in Gordon,
“Modern Morality and Ancient Ethics,”
Internet Encycopedia of Philosophy.

Socraticism: We know what Socrates taught mostly (though not exclusively)
from the early Platonic dialogues (for example, Laches, Charmides, and
Protagoras). His was the prototype of the ethical approaches to virtue in which

wisdom is the Chief Good, the only thing that is always good because it is
necessary to make proper use of everything else. For Socrates, our moral
imperative is to examine our life, and reason is our best guide in doing so. The
eudaimonic life, according to him, consists in acting in the right way, and evil is
the result of ignorance, or amathia (in other words, nobody purposefully wants
to do bad things).
Platonism (the Academy): Plato, in the later dialogues, maintained crucial
aspects of Socrates’s view (critically, that the eudaimonic life is one of practicing
virtue), while at the same time adding a number of metaphysical notions and
recasting things in terms of his famous theory of Forms, where the abstract and
idealized Form of the Good is the transcendent principle of all goodness. He
eventually subordinated individual flourishing to societal needs, as in the
Republic, where the ideal state reflects the tripartite division of the human soul,
and philosophers, naturally, are in charge of it—just as reason is in charge of the
“spirited” and “appetitive” parts of the individual soul.
Aristotelianism (the Peripatetic school, the Lyceum): For Aristotle too, the
point of life was to achieve eudaimonia through the practice of the virtues (of
which he identified a whopping twelve). In Aristotle’s view, there is a proper
function for everything in the world, including humans: our proper function is to
use reason, so using reason well is the way to live a eudaimonic life. However,
we also need some external goods, such as a supportive family and societal
environment, some degree of education, health, and wealth, and even some good
looks. Crucially, then, being able to live a eudaimonic life is not entirely within
the grasp of the agent: some luck, in the form of favorable circumstances, is also
needed.
Cyrenaism: Aristippus of Cyrene was, tellingly enough, the first of Socrates’s
disciples to actually take money for his services. For him, the primary purpose of
life was not long-term happiness but rather the moment-to-moment experience
of bodily pleasures. To achieve this, one needs practical virtue, but only
instrumentally, in order to seek pleasure. Still, we shouldn’t think of the
Cyrenaics as simply being into sex, drugs, and rock ‘n’ roll, but rather as seeking
what might be called enlightened hedonism. As Aristippus put it: “I possess, but
I am not possessed.” Self-control was important in order to maintain
cheerfulness while making the best of every situation.
Epicureanism (the Garden): Epicurus too taught that life is about increasing
one’s pleasure and (especially) reducing one’s pain. But Epicurean hedonism
was much more sophisticated than its Cyrenaic counterpart (despite later

Christian smearing, deployed in a successful attempt to fight a threatening rival
sect). For one thing, it included mental pleasures, which were considered
superior to bodily ones, and happiness was not just a moment-by-moment thing
but a lifelong process. The Epicurean way included freeing oneself from
prejudice (especially of a religious nature), mastering one’s desires, living a
modest life, and cultivating friendship. Crucially, however, Epicureans counseled
withdrawal from social and political life (because it was much more likely to
bring about pain than pleasure).
Cynicism: According to Antisthenes of Athens, the founder of the Cynic
school, virtue understood as practical wisdom is not only necessary for a
eudaimonic life but also sufficient. That is why the Cynics took the already
rather frugal Socratic lifestyle to an extreme. Think of Diogenes of Sinope,
Antisthenes’s student, who famously lived in a tub, begged for a living, and
flaunted just about any social convention. Many Stoics admired the Cynics, and
our friend Epictetus devoted the long chapter 22 of the third book of his
Discourses to an encomium of Cynicism. As he put it, if you really can’t be a
Cynic, at least be a Stoic.
Stoicism: Zeno of Citium, the founder of Stoicism, learned his philosophy
initially from Crates, who was a Cynic and disciple of Diogenes of Sinope. As
the reader by now knows well, Stoicism struck a middle ground between
Aristotelianism and Cynicism, while at the same time strongly rejecting
Epicureanism. The Stoics granted to the Cynics that virtue is both necessary and
sufficient for happiness, but also nodded toward the Peripatetics in recovering
(some) interest in external goods, which they classified into preferred and
dispreferred indifferents, to be pursued, or avoided, so long as they do not
compromise one’s integrity of character.
All in all, there was a nice conceptual progression and ramification from the
Socratic starting point: the Platonic/Aristotelian branch stuck close to Socratic
eudaimonism, but the Platonists went mystical (the theory of Forms, the ideal
Republic), while the Aristotelians turned pragmatic (some external goods are
necessary to achieve eudaimonia). The Cyrenaic/Epicurean branch abandoned
the centrality of virtue and turned toward the pleasure-pain dichotomy instead,
with the crucial difference that the Cyrenaics considered only bodily moment-tomoment pleasures, while the Epicureans most valued intellectual and lifelong
pleasures. (Echoes of their philosophy can be heard in John Stuart Mill and
modern utilitarian ethics.) Finally, the Cynic/Stoic branch stuck with the Socratic
primacy of virtue, with the Cynics turning to an ascetic lifestyle and the Stoics

elaborating a way to recover (and yet put into perspective) what most people
would consider desirable externals. Both of these schools were highly influential
throughout the history of Christianity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
THIS BOOK IS THE RESULT OF A PERSONAL SPIRITUAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, and intellectual
journey that began many years ago and has taken many twists and turns. And
I’m sure this won’t be the end point either. Many people have directly or
indirectly contributed to my journey, and I would like to acknowledge a few of
them: Enrica Chiaromonte, my high school philosophy teacher, who instilled in
me a passion for the subject that took a quarter-century to finally blossom;
Melissa Brenneman, for her support when I made the crazy decision to change
careers and become a philosopher; Corinna Colatore, for being there since the
beginning of my journey into Stoicism and bearing with my daily practice, no
matter how inconvenient it may become at times; my colleagues at the City
College of New York, for their support of my idiosyncratic approach to our
discipline; the many people behind Stoic Week and STOICON, through whom I
discovered Stoicism, and who have welcomed and helped me throughout; my
fellow Stoic (and Buddhist) Greg Lopez, who has taught me much about
Epictetus, Marcus, and Seneca; Tisse Takagi, my agent, who has been
enthusiastic about this project since the beginning and an invaluable guide
throughout; T. J. Kelleher, my editor at Basic Books, whose professionalism
keeps striking me every time we work together; and my very careful copyeditor,
Cindy Buck.

PHOTO

© SIMON

WARDENIER

Massimo Pigliucci is the K. D. Irani Professor of
Philosophy at the City College of New York. He holds
PhDs in genetics, evolutionary biology, and philosophy
and has written for many publications, including the
New York Times and the Washington Post. The author or
editor of ten books, he lives in New York City. Massimo
blogs at platofootnote.org and at howtobeastoic.org.

ALSO BY MASSIMO PIGLIUCCI
Answers for Aristotle: How Science and Philosophy Can Lead Us
to a More Meaningful Life
Philosophy of Pseudoscience: Reconsidering the Demarcation
Problem (co-edited with Maarten Boudry)
Nonsense on Stilts: How to Tell Science from Bunk
Making Sense of Evolution: The Conceptual Foundations of
Evolutionary Biology (with Jonathan Kaplan)

ADVANCE PRAISE FOR

HOW TO BE A STOIC

“This is a lucid, engaging, and persuasive book about what it means to pursue
Stoic ideals in the here and now. Massimo Pigliucci’s imaginary conversations
with Epictetus carry the reader effortlessly along while grounding the discussion
firmly in the ancient Stoic tradition—and in his own life experience. The result
is a compelling picture of a Stoic way of life that is consistent with
contemporary science and philosophy, and is both eminently ethical and downto-earth practical. It will be inviting to Stoics and non-Stoics alike who are
willing to reason together seriously about how (and why) to be a modern Stoic.”
—Lawrence C. Becker, author of A New Stoicism

“If you want to learn the ways of Stoicism, and you’re living in the twenty-first
century, this should be one of the first books you read. Massimo has written a
fine primer for the aspiring Marcus Aurelius.”
—Donald J. Robertson, author of The Philosophy of CBT and Stoicism and the Art of Happiness

NOTES

CHAPTER 1: THE UNSTRAIGHTFORWARD PATH
“At this point you run the risk”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.12. The full text
of Epictetus’s Discourses is at:
http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/discourses.html; his shorter Enchiridion (or
Handbook), written in 135 CE and translated by Elizabeth Carter, can be
found at: http://classics.mit.edu/Epictetus/epicench.html.
“Death is necessary”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.27.
“We die every day”: Seneca, “Letter 24: On Despising Death,” in Seneca the
Younger, Complete Works (Delphi Classics, 2014), 19.
“A man cannot live well”: Seneca, “On Tranquility of Mind,” 11.
Every fall thousands of people: For more information on Stoic Week (“Live
Like a Stoic Philosopher for a Week”), see the website at
http://modernstoicism.com/. For information on STOICON, the related
annual conference of people interested in Stoicism, see
http://modernstoicism.com/stoicon-media/.
“no individual”: Quoted in Robert Epstein, “The Prince of Reason,”
Psychology Today, January 1, 2001.
“The philosophical origins”: Aaron T. Beck, A. John Rush, Brian F. Shaw,
and Gary Emery, Cognitive Therapy of Depression (New York: Guilford
Press, 1987), 8.
the clear dichotomy the Stoics drew: William Irvine, A Guide to the Good
Life (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008).
this knowledge reinforces the idea: To clarify what I mean with an example,
cognitive scientists have also demonstrated time and again that human
beings are bad at estimating probabilities, a fact notoriously exploited by the
gambling and lottery industries. But nobody would take those findings as a
reason to eliminate the study of statistics; on the contrary, it is precisely such
study that can immunize people, at least in part, against common (and
sometimes ruinous!) mistakes in quantitative reasoning.
“Men who have made these discoveries”: Seneca, “Letter 33: On the Futility
of Learning Maxims,” 11.
one of the most renowned teachers in Rome: Not much remains of
Musonius’s writings, but they have been collected in an excellent recent

translation by Cynthia King, Musonius Rufus: Lectures and Sayings, edited
and with a preface by William B. Irvine (William B. Irvine, 2011).
arguably the most famous Stoic of all time: Marcus’s Meditations, a
philosophical diary of personal reflection not originally meant for
publication, is one of the most popular books of all time. Like Epictetus’s
Discourses, it has been continuously in print. For a full version, see The
Meditations by Marcus Aurelius, written in 167 CE and translated by George
Long, available at: http://classics.mit.edu/Antoninus/meditations.html.

CHAPTER 2: A ROAD MAP FOR THE JOURNEY
shipwrecked on a voyage: Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Eminent
Philosophers, VII.2, available at:
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Lives_of_the_Eminent_Philosophers.
who was a long-distance runner: Both physical jobs and practicing sports
often figure in ancient Greco-Roman philosophy. Cleanthes, the second
head of the Stoa, was a pugilist and made a living drawing water from
gardens.
“but for Chrysippus”: Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Eminent Philosophers,
VII.183.
in 155 BCE something very important: See David Sedley, “The School, from
Zeno to Arius Didymus,” in The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics, edited
by Brad Inwood (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
“There are three departments”: Epictetus, Discourses, III.2.
Figure 2.1: This diagram is my own interpretation of a commentary by Donald
Robertson (in his Stoicism and the Art of Happiness: Ancient Tips for
Modern Challenges [Teach Yourself, 2013]), which is in turn derived from
the scholarly work of Pierre Hadot, The Inner Citadel: The Meditations of
Marcus Aurelius (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998).

CHAPTER 3: SOME THINGS ARE IN OUR POWER, OTHERS ARE NOT
“And they said”: Solomon ibn Gabirol, A Choice of Pearls (New York: Bloch
Publishing Co., 1925), chap. 17, verse 2.
“If there’s a remedy”: The Way of the Bodhisattva (Boulder, CO: Shambhala
Publications, 2008), chap. 6, verse 10.
“Make the best use”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, I.1.
“We act very much as if”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.5, I.1.
Cicero explains that the archer: Cicero, De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum
(About the Ends of Goods and Evils), III.22, in Complete Works of Cicero
(Delphi Ancient Classics, 2014).
“News was brought him”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.1.
“What then is the proper training”: Ibid., III.24.

CHAPTER 4: LIVING ACCORDING TO NATURE
“It is no ordinary task”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.9.
We are not the only animals: Frans de Waal, Primates and Philosophers:
How Morality Evolved (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009).
the largest brain-to-body ratio: On the lack of a bone in the human penis and
other oddities, see Robert D. Martin, “The Evolution of Human
Reproduction: A Primatological Perspective,” supplement, American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 134, no. S45 (2007): 59–84.
what exactly constitutes a language: On the uniqueness of human language
and related topics, see Chet C. Sherwood, Francys Subiaul, and Tadeusz W.
Zawidzki, “A Natural History of the Human Mind: Tracing Evolutionary
Changes in Brain and Cognition,” Journal of Anatomy 212 (2008): 426–
454.
Some of these shared traits: A complete list of human universals (always
subject to debate and refinement, of course) is found in Donald Brown,
Human Universals (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1991).
“See that you do not act like a sheep”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.9.
“In every system of morality”: David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature
(London: John Noon, 1739), 335.
ethics has to come from somewhere: Even today most people still think that
the obvious source of morality is a god, but that proposition—which is of
course distinct from the question of whether or not a god (or gods) exist—
was decidedly refuted 2,400 years ago by none other than Socrates, a big
influence on the Stoics. See, for instance, chapter 18 of my Answers for
Aristotle: How Science and Philosophy Can Lead Us to a More Meaningful
Life (New York: Basic Books, 2013).
known as a category mistake: The concept of a category mistake may perhaps
best be understood with the classic example given in intro philosophy
classes: If you ask, “What is the color of triangles?” it may seem that you
are asking a deep question, but in fact you are applying a category (color) to
a concept (triangles) that the category simply does not belong to. Triangles,
as abstract geometrical figures, are described in terms of angles, sizes, and
so forth, but not in terms of color—although of course a particular triangle

may have a certain color. Still, you may fool someone for a few seconds at a
cocktail party with that sort of question. Just make sure to quickly move
away before your interlocutor has had time to think about it for a few
seconds.
we do indeed have a moral instinct: For an accessible piece on the concept of
the moral instinct, see Stephen Pinker, “The Moral Instinct,” New York
Times Magazine, January 13, 2008.
as we approach the age of reason: The so-called five- to seven-year shift (or
six- to eight- ), intuited by the ancients, is now a well-established scientific
concept, backed by solid evidence from both psychology and neuroscience.
See, for instance, Arnold J. Sameroff and Marshall M. Haith, The Five to
Seven Year Shift: The Age of Reason and Responsibility (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996).
“the nature of the rational animal”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.19.
“Each of us is, as it were”: Ethical Fragments of Hierocles, Preserved by
Stobaeus, translated by Thomas Taylor (1822). See the fragment “How we
ought to conduct ourselves towards our kindred.”
“Never… reply to one”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.9.

CHAPTER 5: PLAYING BALL WITH SOCRATES
“[Socrates] was like one playing”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.5.
Greco-Roman soccer: There is pretty good evidence that both the Greeks and
the Romans played some kind of soccer, though the rules of the game have
not survived. The National Museum of Archaeology in Athens houses a
marble relief featuring an adult and a child, with the adult clearly balancing
what the Romans called a folis, which looks like a soccer ball (that is, an
inflated ball). Moreover, Ulpiano tells of a court case in Rome over a man
who was getting a shave in a barber shop being killed by a flying soccer ball
of the pile type, which was characterized by stitches very much like those of
modern soccer balls. See Digesto, IX, 2, 11, pr. 1.
making the obstacle the way: “Our actions may be impeded by [others], but
there can be no impeding our intentions or our dispositions. Because we can
accommodate and adapt. The mind adapts and converts to its own purposes
the obstacle to our acting. The impediment to action advances action. What
stands in the way becomes the way.” Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, V.20.
“How do I know what is going”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.5.
“I was imbued with”: Seneca, Epistles, 108, 22.
“although there are many pleasures”: Musonius Rufus, “The Lecture About
Food,” Lectures, part B, 3, 7, and 8, in Musonius Rufus, Lectures and
Sayings, translated by Cynthia King (CreateSpace, 2011).
there really are only two options: Many so-called informal logical fallacies
are actually not fallacious at all, or at least not always. Often they are simple
heuristics—shortcuts one can use in a pinch to arrive at a satisfactory
understanding of a situation, or a preliminary judgment. Hurling accusations
of logical fallacies is a particularly common practice in discussions of
pseudoscientific claims, as my colleagues and I have argued in this paper:
Maarten Boudry, Fabio Paglieri, and Massimo Pigliucci, “The Fake, the
Flimsy, and the Fallacious: Demarcating Arguments in Real Life,”
Argumentation 29 (2015): 431–456.
Eleven Madison Park: Curious about why I picked on Eleven Madison Park?
Because of this article (Edward Frame, “Dinner and Deception,” New York
Times, August 22, 2015) by one of their former “captains,” which provides a

behind-the-scenes look at the culture of service there and the customers who
use it and abuse it. I should add that I very much doubt that Eleven Madison
Park is special in this respect.
“If [you] must live in a palace”: Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, V.16.
Diogenes seriously practiced: Much of what we know of the life and
adventures of Diogenes the Cynic comes from another Diogenes, Laertius,
in his Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers.
“great difference between joy and pain”: Seneca, On Various Aspects of
Virtue, 18.
the concept of lexicographic preferences: I must thank one of the readers of
my howtobeastoic.org blog, who goes by the handle “timbartik,” for
pointing me in the direction of lexicographic ordering as a good model of
the distinction between virtue and preferred indifferents.
standard economic theory simply does not apply: A number of philosophers
have implicitly used lexicographic ordering when making the case that a
particular good should not be for sale; see, for instance, Michael J. Sandel,
What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets (New York: Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, 2012), and Debra Satz, Why Some Things Should Not Be
for Sale: The Moral Limits of Markets (New York: Oxford University Press,
2010).

CHAPTER 6: GOD OR ATOMS?
“Who is it that has fitted the sword”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.6.
such as Thomas Aquinas: Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae (1273),
Article 3, Question 2.
“In crossing a heath”: William Paley, Natural Theology: or, Evidence of the
Existence and Attributes of the Deity, Collected from the Appearance of
Nature (London: J. Faulder, 1802), ch. 1.
“If we see a house”: David Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion
(1779), part II.
“But I own that I cannot see”: Charles Darwin (1903), More Letters of
Charles Darwin, edited by Francis Darwin and A. C. Seward (New York: D.
Appleton and Co., 1903), 252. See also Sara Joan Miles, “Charles Darwin
and Asa Gray Discuss Teleology and Design,” Perspectives on Science and
Christian Faith 53 (September 2001): 196–201, available at:
http://goo.gl/kbdNR5.
“Slave, do you mean to arraign”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.12. A position very
close to Epictetus’s has recently been articulated and defended with modern
arguments by the philosopher Tim Mulgan in his Purpose in the Universe:
The Moral and Metaphysical Case for Ananthropocentric Purposivism
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2015).
“You are a principal work”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.8.
or perhaps panentheistic: There is a subtle but important distinction between
pantheism and panentheism: in the first case, God is identical to Nature; in
the second, God interpenetrates Nature (that is, God is everywhere), but
there is a distinction between God and Nature nonetheless. What makes the
Stoic case a bit difficult to decide is that, on the one hand, they used the
terms “God” (or “Zeus,” but not referring to the Olympian version) and
“Nature” interchangeably. But they also believed that the universe is made
of matter, some of which (all living beings, including humans) also partakes
of the rational principle, the Logos. So their metaphysics really had
elements of both pantheism and panentheism—not that it really matters for
my purposes here.
“Concerning the gods”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.12. For “where’er I move /

Thou seest me,” see Homer, Iliad, X.279.
“That which is true is mine”: Seneca, Epistles, I.12.11.
“To the gods I am indebted”: Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, I.17.
“Since it is possible”: Ibid., II.11.
“You have embarked”: Ibid., III.3.
“Either there is a fatal necessity”: Ibid., XII.14.
even before New Atheism: For my, shall we say, more mature take on the New
Atheism, see: “New Atheism and the Scientistic Turn in the Atheism
Movement,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 37, no. 1 (2015): 142–153,
available at: http://philpapers.org/rec/PIGNAA.
When I was living in Tennessee: For a taste of my debates, if you are so
inclined, see “Dr. Massimo Pigliucci vs. Kent Hovind [a creationist],”
posted March 7, 2012, https://goo.gl/0ab5OX; “William Lane Craig [a
theologian] vs. Massimo Pigliucci,” posted December 9, 2012,
https://goo.gl/D4T7h7; and “Creation/Evolution Debate: Dr. [Duane] Gish
[a creationist] vs. Dr. [Massimo] Pigliucci, May 20, 1999, Part 1,” posted
April 6, 2013, https://goo.gl/txfKjG.
“There are many questions in philosophy”: Cicero, The Nature of the Gods,
in Complete Works of Cicero (Delphi Ancient Classics, 2014).

CHAPTER 7: IT’S ALL ABOUT CHARACTER (AND VIRTUE)
“When Vespasian sent to him”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.2.
the only human ability: A thorough discussion of Socrates’s take on wisdom
as the chief good is found in the Platonic dialogue known as the
Euthydemus. Plato, Euthydemus, translated by G. A. McBryer and M. P.
Nichols, introduction by D. Schaeffer (Focus Philosophical Library, 2010). I
published a commentary on it from a Stoic perspective, “Why Plato’s
Euthydemus Is Relevant to Stoics,” How to Be a Stoic, August 20, 2015,
available at: https://goo.gl/9K3t2a.
we must have wisdom: The ancients recognized two types of wisdom: sophia,
which refers to the ability to understand the nature of the world—the word
“philosophy” means “love” (philo) of “wisdom” (sophos)—and phron sis,
or practical wisdom, the ability to make good decisions in your life, and one
of the four Stoic virtues. Lack of sophia, as we will soon see, has its own
word, amathia, which leads to moral error regardless of your intelligence
and education. Being smart and cultured, in other words, is no assurance of
being wise.
A study by Katherine Dahlsgaard: Katherine Dahlsgaard, Christopher
Peterson, and Martin E. P. Seligman, “Shared Virtue: The Convergence of
Valued Human Strengths Across Culture and History,” Review of General
Psychology 9 (2005): 203–213.
six “core” virtues: The list is adapted from ibid., table 1.
“The Pythagoreans bid us”: Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, XI.27.
“‘Lay aside the senator’s dress’”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.29.
“You are a man”: Ibid., II.3.
“For the helmsman to wreck his vessel”: Ibid., IV.3.

CHAPTER 8: A VERY CRUCIAL WORD
“Manifold are thy shapings”: Quoted in Robert Browning: Selected Poems,
edited by John Woolford, Daniel Karlin, and Joseph Phelan (New York:
Routledge, 2013), 364.
“This is the defense”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.26.
“What is the reason”: Ibid., I.28.
“During the war, Ernst Jünger”: Thanks to my friend Amy Valladares for
pointing out this interview to me and for translating the bit I quote here. The
full interview, “Hannah Arendt im Gespräch mit Joachim Fest (1964)” (in
German), can be found at: https://goo.gl/JOeyJC (posted August 8, 2014).
An English-language transcript was published as Hannah Arendt: The Last
Interview and Other Conversations (New York: Melville House, 2013).
“Wisdom alone”: Plato, Euthydemus, 281d.
Belangia has written extensively: Sherwood Belangia, “Ignorance vs.
Stupidity,” Shared Ignorance, September 8, 2014, https://goo.gl/vmI0hg.
an Athenian general and politician: Alcibiades is a wonderfully interesting
historical figure about whom—surprisingly—nobody seems to have written
a biography or made a movie. They ought to. He began the Peloponnesian
War on the side of Athens, his native city. He was eventually exiled and
defected to Sparta, for whom he engineered a number of defeats of Athens.
Then he became unpopular in Sparta as well, so he defected to Persia, the
sworn enemy of the Greek city-states. He was then recalled by Athens,
where he engineered what turned out to be the disastrous invasion of Sicily,
arguably a major reason why Athens eventually lost the war. But it could
have gone otherwise had Alcibiades actually been able to lead the expedition
as planned. Instead, his fellow citizens exiled him again and gave command
to the inept Nicias. Alcibiades then fled once more, this time to Phrygia,
where he sought help to fight Sparta. He was probably killed by Spartan
agents in the mountains of Phrygia.
“But if you are bewildered”: Alcibiades Major, 118a–c, in Plato in Twelve
Volumes, vol. 8, translated by W. R. M. Lamb (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press; London: William Heinemann Ltd., 1955).
“A-gnoia means literally”: Belangia, “Ignorance vs. Stupidity,” available at:

https://woodybelangia.com/2014/09/08/ignorance-vs-stupidity/.
elucidation of the concept of amathia: Glenn Hughes quoted in ibid. from an
essay entitled “Voegelin’s Use of Musil’s Concept of Intelligent Stupidity in
Hitler and the Germans” (Eric Voegelin Institute, 2007).
“I know full well”: Euripides, Medea, 1078.
“Here the very gratification”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.28.
“Every error implies conflict”: Ibid., II.26.
the more clever people are: Michael Shermer, Why People Believe Weird
Things (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1997).
help students change their conceptual outlook: Barbara J. Guzzetti, Tonja E.
Snyder, Gene V. Glass, and Warren S. Gamas, “Promoting Conceptual
Change in Science: A Comparative Meta-analysis of Instructional
Interventions from Reading Education and Science Education,” Reading
Research Quarterly 28 (1993): 116–159.
“‘Such a one reviled you’”: Epictetus, Discourses, IV.5.

CHAPTER 9: THE ROLE OF ROLE MODELS
“Oh, that’s easy”: Stephen Palmer, “The Stockdale Paradox: The Right Way to
Leverage Hope,” http://stephendpalmer.com/stockdale-paradox-hope/.
Stockdale became a fellow: Two essays by Stockdale on Stoicism are available
online: “The Stoic Warrior Triad: Tranquility, Fearlessness, and Freedom,”
lecture delivered April 18, 1995, http://goo.gl/dszFyQ; and “Master of My
Fate: A Stoic Philosopher in a Hanoi Prison,” n.d., http://goo.gl/jrooWm.
“After ejection”: VADM James B. Stockdale, “Stockdale on Stoicism II: Master
of My Fate,” 5,
https://www.usna.edu/Ethics/_files/documents/Stoicism2.pdf.
“By the time the tackling”: VADM James B. Stockdale, “Stockdale on
Stoicism I: The Stoic Warrior’s Triad,” 16,
https://www.usna.edu/Ethics/_files/documents/stoicism1.pdf.
“Lameness is an impediment”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, 9.
“When a man who has set his will”: Epictetus, Discourses, IV.7.
Lieutenants Clark Kent and Ben Casey: Clark Kent is, of course, Superman’s
alter ego. Ben Casey was the surgeon protagonist of Ben Casey, a popular
American television series of the early 1960s.
“Tranquillity, fearlessness”: Epictetus, Discourses, III.15.
modern biology and developmental psychology: See Massimo Pigliucci,
Phenotypic Plasticity: Beyond Nature and Nurture (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 2001).
“Can you tell me, Socrates”: The following discussion is informed by a clear
and compelling paper by Hugh Mercer Cutler, “Can Virtue Be Taught?”
Humanitas 7, no. 1 (1994), http://www.nhinet.org/humsub/curtl7–1.pdf.
Kohlberg’s theory has been criticized: See Lawrence Kohlberg, Charles
Levine, and Alexandra Hewer, Moral Stages: A Current Formulation and a
Response to Critics (Basel: Karger Publishing, 1983).
a major aspect of the environment: Pigliucci, Phenotypic Plasticity, 253–262.
the nature of the wise person: Seneca, “On the Firmness of the Wise Person,”
in Complete Works.
known as Cato the Younger: For a recent biography of Cato, see Rob
Goodman and Jimmy Soni, Rome’s Last Citizen: The Life and Legacy of

Cato, Mortal Enemy of Caesar (New York: St. Martin’s Press/Thomas
Dunne Books, 2012).
“Cato did not immediately die”: Plutarch, “Life of Cato,” in Parallel Lives,
Delphi Complete Works of Plutarch (Delphi Classics, 2013), 70.6.
“What about ordinary life”: Massimo Pigliucci, “On Death and Stoicism,” IN
SIGHT series, Aeon, https://aeon.co/videos/how-the-stoic-embrace-ofdeath-can-help-us-get-a-grip-on-life.

CHAPTER 10: DISABILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS
Becker, now a retired professor: Lawrence Becker, A New Stoicism (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
I spent several months discussing: The New York City Stoics meet-up group
can be found at: http://www.meetup.com/New-York-City-Stoics/.
the two of us were introduced: One of the outcomes of meeting Larry Becker
was an interview that I did with him on different aspects of Stoic theory and
practice. “Interview with Larry Becker” was posted in four parts on March
22, 24, 29, and 31, 2016, on the How to Be a Stoic website:
https://goo.gl/cfPGgL; https://goo.gl/FyFZT8; https://goo.gl/hKgW1w; and
https://goo.gl/Gcc6La.
video… for Post-Polio Health International: The video of Larry Becker’s
address at a meeting of the Post-Polio Health International, “Developing a
Personal Philosophy About Disability,” is available at:
http://www.polioplace.org/personal-philosophy-disability.
modern cognitive science clearly shows: For a few examples of studies
showing that “consumer paralysis” results from having too many choices,
see Hazel Rose Markus and Barry Schwartz, “Does Choice Mean Freedom
and Well-being?” Journal of Consumer Research 37 (2010): 344–355; Tina
Harrison, Kathryn Waite, and Phil White, “Analysis by Paralysis: The
Pension Purchase Decision Process,” International Journal of Bank
Marketing 24 (2006): 5–23; and Graeme Drummond, “Consumer
Confusion: Reduction Strategies in Higher Education,” International
Journal of Educational Management 18 (2006): 317–323.
“Bear and forbear”: Epictetus, Aulus Gellius, Noctes Acticae, xii.19.
Our acquaintance: See Andrew Overby, “How Stoicism Helped Me Overcome
Depression,” Stoicism Today, September 19, 2015, http://goo.gl/sIGWuR.
what it is like to be another person: As it turns out, “what is it like to be [not
you]” is one of those impossible philosophical problems; see Thomas Nagel,
“What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83, no. 4 (October
1974): 435–450, http://goo.gl/PjZSeM.
“The art of life”: Marcus Aurelius, Meditations, VII.61.
“One of the most interesting developments”: William Irvine, A Guide to the

Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2008), 254.
“Stand by a stone”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.25.
I don’t even know the name: See “Stoicism as a Means to Cope with Autism,”
Stoicism Today, April 26, 2015, http://goo.gl/YOQBfM. I do not have space
here to discuss several more modern Stoics I’m aware of whose approaches
to personal, nontrivial problems in life provide additional examples of the
power of this philosophy; see Leonidas Konstantakos, “On Epictetus and
Post-Traumatic Stress,” Stoicism Today, January 30, 2016,
http://goo.gl/0xXDrl; Chris Peden, “Autism and Stoicism I,” Stoicism
Today, April 25, 2015, http://goo.gl/0gXOyV (written from the point of view
of a parent of two autistic children); and the powerfully moving essay by
Marco Bronx, “In Praise of Chronic Pain: A Stoic Meditation,” Stoicism
Today, July 30, 2016, https://goo.gl/F5zOi2.
“Our relations with one another”: Seneca, “On the Usefulness of Basic
Principles,” Letters to Lucilius, XCV.53.
“I do not know whether”: Seneca, “On Reformation,” Letters to Lucilius,
XXV.2.

CHAPTER 11: ON DEATH AND SUICIDE
They were aware of death: Similarly empowering notions of death are found in
other philosophies, such as Epicureanism (Stoicism’s direct rival) and
Buddhism (Stoicism’s Eastern cousin).
“Why does an as of wheat grow?”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.6.
“Will you realize once for all”: Ibid., III.26.
later figures influenced by Stoicism: The title of one of Michel de Montaigne’s
famous essays (collected in a book that gave the name to the entire modern
genre) was “That to Study Philosophy Is to Learn to Die” (1580); the full
text is available at:
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Essays_of_Montaigne. Tellingly, it
begins: “Cicero says ‘that to study philosophy is nothing but to prepare
one’s self to die.’”
“Death, therefore”: Epicurus, “Letter to Menoeceus,”
http://www.epicurus.net/en/menoeceus.html.
“You shall bear illness well”: Epictetus, Discourses, III.26.
“What do you mean”: Ibid., IV.7.
This is not the place to explain: Should you be curious, I’ve developed those
reasons in detail in Massimo Pigliucci, “Mind Uploading: A Philosophical
Counter-analysis,” in Intelligence Unbound: The Future of Uploaded and
Machine Minds, edited by Russell Blackford and Damien Broderick
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2014).
“Yes, those at the Mysteries”: Epictetus, Discourses, IV.1.
On the weekend of July 23 and 24, 2016: Julie Watson, “Terminally Ill Woman
Holds Party Before Ending Her Life,” Associated Press, August 11, 2016,
http://goo.gl/jqOr2A.
“If it is not to your profit”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.1.
The “open door”: Interpreting Epictetus’s “open door” as a reference to suicide
is widely accepted in ancient philosophy scholarship. See, for instance, W.
O. Stephens, “Epictetus on Fearing Death: Bugbear and Open Door Policy,”
Ancient Philosophy 34 (2014): 365–391.
“Suppose someone made the room smoke”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.25.
“For the foot (for instance)”: Ibid., II.5.

The last example is Seneca: Two recent biographies of Seneca have somewhat
different takes on his moral fiber and philosophical coherence: James
Romm, Dying Every Day: Seneca at the Court of Nero (New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, 2014); and Emily Wilson, The Greatest Empire: A Life of Seneca
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014).
“Let me describe another state”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.15.
“Stay where you are”: Ibid., I.9.

CHAPTER 12: HOW TO DEAL WITH ANGER, ANXIETY, AND
LONELINESS
Aristophanes made fun of Socrates: Plato did not appreciate Aristophanes’s
lampooning of his teacher and went so far as to partially blame the
playwright, in his dialogue Phaedo, for Socrates’s later execution by the
Athenian state. The claim is doubtful, but not entirely unjustified, according
to modern scholars.
“Yesterday I had an iron lamp”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.18 and I.29.
But our sage disagrees: Ironically, Lucian of Samosata tells us that when
Epictetus died, a friend of his got hold of a lamp that had belonged to the
philosopher and managed to sell it for the excellent price of 3,000 drachmas.
I’m pretty sure the philosopher would have disapproved.
modern psychological research: A useful article on recognizing and managing
anger from a modern psychological perspective is: American Psychological
Association, “Controlling Anger Before It Controls You,”
http://www.apa.org/topics/anger/control.aspx.
“‘What!’ you say”: Epictetus, Discourses, I.18.
approaches to reforming criminals: For three examples of prison systems that
a Stoic would endorse, see “Inside Norway’s Progressive Prison System,”
CNN, August 3, 2011,
http://edition.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/europe/08/02/vbs.norwegian.prisons/;
“Progressive Prison Keeps Door Open,” This Is Finland,
http://finland.fi/life-society/progressive-prison-keeps-doors-open/; and
“Nicholas Turner and Jeremy Travis, “What We Learned from German
Prisons,” New York Times, August 6, 2015.
the early intuitions of the Stoics: APA, “Controlling Anger Before It Controls
You.”
“When I see a man”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.12.
Worse things happen at sea: I hope you know what I’m referring to. If not,
take a look at “Monty Python: Always Look on the Bright Side of Life,”
https://youtu.be/jHPOzQzk9Qo (around 2’30”) (uploaded July 28, 2006).
“We are anxious for our bit”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.13.
headlines that read: Here are the pertinent articles: Rebecca Harris, “The

Loneliness Epidemic: We’re More Connected Than Ever—But Are We
Feeling More Alone?” The Independent, March 30, 2015; Vanessa Barford,
“Is Modern Life Making Us Lonely?” BBC News Magazine, April 8, 2013;
and Janice Shaw Crouse, “The Loneliness of American Society,” The
American Spectator, May 18, 2014. A quick Google search will reveal many,
many more.
interesting discussion of loneliness: Colin Killeen, “Loneliness: An Epidemic
in Modern Society,” Journal of Advanced Nursing 28 (1998): 762–770.
“[Loneliness] is such an innate part”: Ibid., 762.
“The forlorn state is the condition”: Epictetus, Discourses, III.13.

CHAPTER 13: LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP
“I am so miserable”: This and the following quotes regarding Epictetus’s
encounter with the distraught father are from Discourses, I.11.
“But though we are capable”: Ibid., IV.5.
“We see that the carpenter”: Ibid., II.14 and I.29.
storgē, a far less frequently used word: This sense of the inevitability of storgē
explains why the word, counterintuitively, was also used to indicate some
things we have no choice but to put up with, like “loving” a tyrant.
“For where else is friendship”: Epictetus, Discourses, II.22.

CHAPTER 14: PRACTICAL SPIRITUAL EXERCISES
a number of other recent books: These very practical books on Stoicism
include William B. Irvine, A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of
Stoic Joy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008); and Donald
Robertson, Stoicism and the Art of Happiness: Ancient Tips for Modern
Challenges (Teach Yourself, 2013).
I have gone through the Enchiridion: Many thanks to my friend, fellow Stoic,
and collaborator on many ventures, Greg Lopez, who has generously helped
me put together these exercises.
The first goal is to become mindful: Greg and I have put together a broader set
of exercises, twenty-four in total, by adding several more to this list from
Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations. For the full package, go to How to Be a
Stoic, “Collections,” https://howtobeastoic.wordpress.com/collections/.
In modern economic theory: As discussed in Chapter 5, lexicographic ordering
is at work when some philosophers argue that particular goods should not be
for sale; see Sandel, What Money Can’t Buy, and Satz, Why Some Things
Should Not Be for Sale.
“So make a practice”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, I.5.
“Agents are required”: Lawrence C. Becker, A New Stoicism (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1997), 42.
“In the case of particular things”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, III.
“Whenever planning an action”: Ibid., IV.
“For every challenge”: Ibid., X.
“bear and forbear”: Epictetus, Discourses, IV.8.
“Remember, it is not enough”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, XX.
“[The next time] you encounter”: Ibid., CI.
“We can familiarize ourselves”: Ibid., XXVI.
“Let silence be your goal”: Ibid., XXXIII.2.
“Avoid fraternizing”: Ibid., XXXIII.6.
“If you learn that someone”: Ibid., XXXIII.9.
an active set of social networks: On Twitter, https://twitter.com/mpigliucci.
two blogs: My blog on general philosophy can be found at platofootnote.org; the
one on Stoicism at howtobeastoic.org.

“In your conversation”: Epictetus, Enchiridion, XXXIII.14.
“Someone bathes in haste”: Ibid., XLV.
“Admit not sleep”: Epictetus, Aulus Gellius, Noctes Acticae, xii.19.
“The spirit ought to be brought up”: Seneca, On Anger, III.36.
APPENDIX: THE HELLENISTIC SCHOOLS OF PRACTICAL
PHILOSOPHY
a simplified genealogical tree: The diagram is adapted from John-Stewart
Gordon, “Modern Morality and Ancient Ethics,” Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, http://www.iep.utm.edu/anci-mod/ (accessed May 27, 2016).
it all began with Socrates: There is a reason why the whole history of Western
philosophy is divided into pre-Socratics and whatever happened from
Socrates onward.

INDEX

Academy, 19, 20, 21, 234, 235 fig. A.1, 236
accidents, as part of normal order of things, 219
action, discipline of, 24–25, 24 fig. 2.1, 203
adversity, equanimity in, 148
Aesop, 119
aesthetics, 233
agápe (disinterested love), 191
age, loneliness and, 183
agency, importance of, 143–144
agnoia (lack of reason), 115–116
airplane landing incident, 33–34
Alcibaiades, 114–115
Alcibaiades Major (Plato), 114–115
Alexander the Great, 74
Alexandria, 20
alienation, 183
alienation-connectedness continuum, 183
Alighieri, Dante, 12–13
amathia (lack of wisdom), 114–116, 118, 120–121, 175, 236
American Psychological Association (APA), 175–178
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 164
analogies, 82
anger management, 172–179
changing one’s environment, 178–179
cognitive restructuring, 176

communication, 177
equanimity, 217
exercise, 176
humor, 178
internalizing goals, 177
lamp thief example, 172–173
practicing avoidance, 179
problem-solving, 177
recasting situations, 174–175
reducing opportunities for conflict, 179
relaxation techniques, 175–176
shifting interaction timing, 179
stolen wallet example, 173–174
Answers for Aristotle: How Science and Philosophy Can Lead Us to a More
Meaningful Life (Pigliucci), 4
Antisthenes of Athens, 73, 234, 235 fig. A.1, 237
anxiety, 179–182
classroom lecture example, 180–181
dichotomy of control and, 180, 182
disorders, 181
Epictetus’s thoughts on, 179–181
singing performance example, 180
Anytus, 65
apathia (tranquillity of mind), 215
aphorisms, 63–64
archery metaphor, 35
Arendt, Hannah, 112–113
argument from design, 80–82
Aristion, 20
Aristippus, 234, 235 fig. A.1, 236–237
Aristophanes, 171
Aristotelianism, 73, 234, 236, 238
Aristotle
choosing friends, 223

essential characteristics of humans, 50
eudamonia, achievement of, 74
humans as rational animals, 48
relationship to other schools of philosophy, 235 fig. A.1
types of friendship, 196–197
virtue, acquisition of, 130
virtue ethics, 73
Arrian of Nicomedia, 14, 176, 202–203
asceticism, 10
assent
anger management and, 177
defined, 23, 25
discipline of, 24 fig. 2.1, 25, 204
Epictetus’s thoughts on, 111
Istanbul restaurant example, 43
refraining from judgment, 45, 228
relationship between disciplines, inquiry, and virtues, 24 fig. 2.1
stolen wallet example, 173
use of, 26
assisted suicide, 164
ataraxia (tranquillity of mind), 10
atheism, 4, 10, 81, 88, 90
Athenion, 20
Athens, Greece, 17, 18, 20, 74, 110, 202
Augustine (saint), 21
Aulus Gellius, 59
autism spectrum disorder, 152–153
avoidance, 179
axiom of futility, 207
Bacon, Francis, 21
ball-playing analogy, 64–65
banality of evil, 112–113
bank account example, 67–68

“bear and forbear,” 146, 176, 215
Beck, Aaron T., 9
Becker, Lawrence, 139–146, 207
Belangia, Sherwood, 114, 116
bereavement, 183
Bible, 89, 119
body weight example, 35–37
Boethius, 21
bonobo chimpanzees, 57
bravery, 100
Bruno, Giordano, 21
Buddhism, 3, 5, 10, 30, 31, 40, 118
bullying, 225–226
call of the cosmos, 166–167
cancer, 209
cardinal virtues, 24 fig. 2.1, 25, 100, 205
Cato the Younger, 134–136, 168, 169
character, 95–107
Epictetus’s conception of, 103–104, 106
friendship and, 195–196
Helvidius Priscus example, 95–96
improving, 182
indifferents and, 238
letter of introduction example, 104
Malala Yousafzai example, 96–97
political positions on, 98
presidential candidates and, 104–105
role of in politics, 105
seafaring metaphor, 106
value of, 106–107
See also integrity; virtue
charity, 100
Charmides, 235

chimpanzees, 57
choice continuum, 183
Christianity
agápe (disinterested love), 191
argument from design, 80, 82
compassion, 117
concept of virtues, 99–100
conduct in everyday life, 89
creationism example, 119
Jesus as idealized role model, 133
legalization of, 21
philosophical influences on, 239
Protestant theology, influence of Stoicism on, 21
rephrasings, 174
See also Stoicism and Christianity
Chrysippus of Soli, 19, 23, 212
Cicero, 20, 22, 35, 37, 91
Citium (modern-day Cyprus), 18
citizenship, 101
classroom lecture example, 180–181
Cleanthes, 19
Clinton, Bill, 148
Clinton Library, Arkansas, 148
The Clouds (Aristophanes), 171
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 9, 21, 152
cognitive dissonance, 119–120
cognitive restructuring, 176
Cognitive Therapy of Depression (Beck), 9
communication, 177
companions, choice of, 222–223
compassion, 117–118, 229
Confucianism, 2
conservatives, political, 98, 103, 105
conspiracy theorists, 120

Constantine, Emperor, 21
consumerism, 208
contemplation, 48
conventional morality, 131
conversation, 219–222, 226–228
coping skills, 142, 153–154
cosmic dust, return to, 161
cosmopolitanism, 60–61, 60 fig. 4.1, 101
country, blind allegiance to, 193
courage, 24, 99, 100, 105, 107, 137, 205
Crates, 18, 238
Creation Research, Institute for, 89
creationism, 82, 88, 119
creativity, 65, 101
criminals, reforming, 175
criticism, 226
Crito (Plato), 66
curiosity, 101
cut finger episode, 215–216
Cynics/Cynicism
cosmopolitanism, 61, 101
defined, 237–238
emphasis on virtue, 19, 73–74, 77, 237
as forerunner of Stoicism, 234
influence on Stoics, 19
relationship to other schools of philosophy, 235 fig. A.1
Cyrenaics/Cyrenaism, 19, 234, 235 fig. A.1, 236–237, 238
Dahlsgaard, Katherine, 100, 102
Dante. See Alighieri, Dante
Darwin, Charles, 49, 82–83, 119
Davis, Betsy, 164
Dawkins, Richard, 4
De Rossi, Barbara, 109–110

death
Epictetus’s thoughts on, 157–161, 219
inevitability of, 6–7
Transhumanists, 162–163
See also suicide
Decatur, Stephen, 192
deists, 86
Demetrius, 40
depression, 146–152
Andrew Overby ‘s experience, 146–152
coping skills, 142, 153–154
dichotomy of control and, 149–151
negative thinking, 149
negative visualization, 151–152
self-knowledge, 147, 148–149
Descartes, René, 21
desire, discipline of, 24, 203
destiny, 158
developmental morality, 130–131
dichotomy of control, 29–45
airplane landing example, 33–34
anxiety and, 180
archery metaphor, 35
body weight example, 35–37
death and, 159
examination of impressions, 206, 216–217
explanation of, 34
food poisoning incident, 206–207
job promotion example, 37–38
levels of influence over the world, 33
movie example, 211–212
negative thinking and, 149
Paconius Agrippinus’s example, 39
Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus’s example, 39–40

Serenity Prayer, versions of, 30–31
Slaughterhouse Five (Vonnegut), 29–30
teenage daughter example, 38
thievery examples, 174
Turkish coup example, 42–45
voyage analogy, 33
wounded leg example, 83, 85
Diogenes Laertius, 17, 18, 19, 167
Diogenes of Babylon, 20
Diogenes of Sinope (the Cynic), 73–74, 104, 237–238
Dionysia festival, 109
disability, physical, 139–146
avoiding brick walls, 145–146
coping skills, 153–154
developing life plan, 145
focusing on abilities, 144
Lawrence Becker’s experience, 139–146
maintaining agency, 143–144
self-knowledge, 144
striving for internal harmony, 145
discipline of action, 24–25, 24 fig. 2.1, 203
discipline of assent, 24 fig. 2.1, 25, 204
discipline of desire, 24, 24 fig. 2.1, 203
Discourses (Epictetus), 14, 19, 126, 212, 229, 238
dispreferred indifferents, 64, 75, 144, 204
distraught father example, 187–189
Divine Comedy (Dante Alighieri), 13
dog and leash example, 212–213
Domitian, emperor of Rome, 13, 14, 96
Early Stoa, 20
education, 10, 70, 204
Edward Snowden example, 66–67
Eichmann, Adolf, 112–113, 118

Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (Arendt), 112
Einstein, Albert, 84
Elements of Ethics (Hierocles), 59
Eleven Madison Park, 71–72
Ellis, Albert, 8–9, 21
empathy, 147, 218
empiricism, 57
Enchiridion or Handbook (Epictetus), 31, 126, 176, 202, 203
endurance, 214
“endure and renounce,” 215
Enlightenment, 221
Epaphroditos, 13
Epictetus
adoption of friend’s child, 14, 42
anger management, 172–173
anxiety, 181–182
assent, 111–112
”bear and forbear,” 146, 176, 215
character, 103–104, 106
companions, choice of, 222–223
compassion, 117–118, 120–121
conversation, 219–222, 226–228
crime, 174–175
death, 6, 158–161
dichotomy of control, 31–33, 40–42
distraught father example, 187–189
”endure and renounce,” 215
foot analogy, 166
fruit of teachings, 129
God/gods, 79–80, 85–86
horse training analogy, 159
illness, 160, 215, 219
indifferents, 64–67
judgment of others, 228–229

lameness, 127
life of, 13–14
lion and fox proverb, 190
living according to nature, 47, 50, 54, 58
loneliness, 184–185
loss of integrity, 173
nonattachment to things and people, 40–42
rebuttal of Epicurus, 19
regret, 38
slander, 151
on Stoic areas of study, 23
suicide, 164–170
truth, 190
what is, and is not, in our power, 32–33, 39
wounded leg example, 83–84
Epicureanism, 73, 234, 237, 238
Epicureans, 19, 86, 88, 160, 237
Epicurus, 19, 86, 160, 196, 235 fig. A.1
epistemology, 11, 22, 233
equanimity
anger management and, 217
archery metaphor, 35
dichotomy of control and, 35–39, 205
in face of adversity, 148, 219
job promotion example, 37–38
Paconius Agrippinus’s experience, 39
Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus’s experience, 39–40
as Stoic goal, 215
teenage daughter example, 38
Erasmus, 21
Erdoğan, Recep Tayyip, 43
éros (love of beauty), 191
essentialism, 53
Eteocles, 194

ethical culture, 2, 10
ethics
ancient study of, 22
derivation of term, 22
garden metaphor, 23
modern, 233
moral development, 131–132
relationships between disciplines, areas of study and cardinal virtues, 24 fig.
2.1
roots of morality, 56–57
Stoic approach to, 58–61, 72–73
ethics, virtue, 4, 73
êthos (root of ethics, character), 22
eudaimonia (the life worth living), 181, 234, 236
eudaimonic life, 73–75, 237
eudaimonic schools, 19
Euphorion, 109
Euripides, 109, 117
Euthydemus dialogue (Plato), 114
evil, 109–121
banality of, 112–113
cognitive dissonance and, 120–121
death, 159–160
Epictetus’s thoughts on, 111
gods and, 87
ignorance (amathia) and, 114–121, 136, 174–175, 236
as label for behavior, 113–114
Medea, 109–110, 117–119, 195–196
Nazi Germany example, 112–113
torture example, 127–128
evolution, Darwinian theory of, 49–50
examination of impressions, 206, 216–217
examples
airplane landing, 33–34

archery metaphor, 35
ball-playing analogy, 64–65
bank account, 67–68
bathhouse, 211
body weight, 35–37
classroom lecture, 180–181
creationism, 119
cut finger episode, 215–216
distraught father, 187–189
dog and leash, 212–213
Edward Snowden, 66–67
food poisoning incident, 206–207
food sources, 68–72
foot analogy, 166
fox and grapes, 119
garden metaphor, 23
horse training analogy, 159
human and cosmic designer analogy, 82
Istanbul restaurant, 43, 45
job promotion, 37–38
lamp thief, 172–173
letter of introduction, 104
movie, 211–212
Nazi Germany, 112–113
Paconius Agrippinus, 39
Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus, 39–40
purpose of purple (in garments), 96
seafaring metaphor, 106
singing performance, 180
Socrates’s suicide, 66
stolen wallet, 173–174
teenage daughter, 38
tennis match, 213–214
thievery, 174

torture, 127–128
Turkish coup, 42–45
voyage analogy, 33
workout analogy, 227
wounded leg, 83–84, 85
exercise, 36, 176, 227
Exeter, University of, 7
exile, 14, 39, 42, 96, 165, 168
Existentialism, 21
external goods, 25, 236, 238
fairness, 101, 205
faith, 100
false dichotomy, 71
Fannia (wife of Helvidius Priscus), 96
fantasia (creativity), 65
fear, 127, 128
fearlessness, 129
Festinger, Leon, 119
food, ethical dilemmas and, 68–72
food poisoning incident, 206–207
food source examples, 68–72
foot analogy, 166
forgiveness, 101
Forms, theory of, 236, 238
Frankl, Viktor, 8–9, 21
Frederick the Great, King of Prussia, 126
freedom, 129
friendship, 194–199
character and, 195–196
between criminals, 194
of the good, 198
of pleasure, 198
as preferred indifferent, 194

Stoic view of, 193–196, 198–199
as type of love, 193
of utility, 197
fundamentalists, 89, 90, 119
futurists, 162
Gaarder, Jostein, 152
Gaius Lucilius, 7, 176
Gaius Musonius Rufus. See Musonius Rufus
Galen, 42
Garden, 235 fig. A.1, 237
garden metaphor, 23
gene-environment interactions, 36, 131
Gish, Duane, 89
Godgods, 79–91
argument from design, 80–82
Einstein’s God, 84
Epictetus’s view of, 79–80, 85–86
existence of suffering, 83
identification with Nature, 84–85
irrelevance of beliefs to actual conduct, 89
Marcus Aurelius’s belief in, 87–88
Stoic ambiguity over, 86–88, 90–91
Stoic conception of, 22, 84
universe, cause and effect in, 85
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 169
Gore, Albert, 123
gossip, 219, 221
gratitude, 101, 151
A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy (Irvine), 11, 213, 234
Gyara, 165
Hadrian, emperor of Rome, 14, 202
Handbook (Epictetus), 31, 126, 176, 202, 203

Hanoi Hilton, 124, 125, 127
happiness, 233, 237
harmonious life, 145
Harris, Sam, 4
health, 10, 183, 204, 207
hedonic treadmill, 77
hedonism, 237
Hellenistic schools of philosophy, 234–239, 235 fig. A.1
Helvidius Priscus, 95–96
Herennius Senecio, 96
hero, use of term, 132–133, 168–169
hic et nunc (here and now), 42, 210
Hierapolis (present-day Pamukkale, Turkey), 13
Hierocles, 59–60
Hinduism, 100
Hitler, Adolf, 112, 113
honesty, 100, 137
Hoover Institution, Stanford University, 126
hope, 100, 101
horse training analogy, 159
Hughes, Glenn, 116
human nature
banality of evil, 112
biology of, 49–52
philosophers’ view of, 53
religious view of, 48–49
social aspect of, 48, 58–59
humanism, secular, 2, 5, 10
humanity, 101
humans
control over own thoughts, 11–12
cross-cultural traits of, 53
differences from other animals, 51–52, 54
need for philosophy of life, 9–10, 12

rationality of, 54
Hume, David, 55, 81–82
humility, 101
humor, 178
ibn Gabirol, Solomon, 30
ignorance, 91, 113–115, 144, 159, 236
illness, 160, 215, 219
impermanence, 207
impressions, examination of, 206, 216–217
In Love and War (Stockdale), 9
indifferents
ball-playing analogy, 64–65
bank account example, 67–68
character and, 238
defined, 64, 74–75
dispreferred, 64, 75, 144, 204
Edward Snowden example, 66–67
food source examples, 68–72
health, 207
lexicographic indexing, 76–77
preferred, 10, 64, 74, 199, 204, 205
Institute for Creation Research, 89
insult pacifism, 224
insults, handling, 150, 216–217, 223–226
integrity
Cato’s incorruptibility, 135
friendship and, 195–196, 199, 238
lamp thief example, 172–173
lexicographic preferences, 75–76
maintaining, 75, 168, 182
Seneca’s suicide, 168
Socrates’s suicide, 66
Stoic view of, 238

stolen wallet example, 173–174
torture example, 128
using virtue as guide, 75
value of, 106, 173
See also character
intellectual virtue, 130
intelligent stupidity, 116
internal harmony, 145
internalizing goals, 177, 213–214
Internet, 224–225
intuitionism, 57
Inughuit (Greenland), 102
Irvine, William (Bill)
choosing a philosophy, 234
dichotomy of control, 11
humor as antidote to anger, 178, 223–224
as insult connoisseur, 150
internalizing goals, 177
keeping in line with nature, 213
is/ought gap, 55–56
isolation, 129
Istanbul, Turkey, 42–45
Jesus, 133
job promotion example, 37–38
Johnson, Lyndon B., 124
Journal of Advanced Nursing (Killeen), 182
Judaism, 10, 31, 100
judgment of others, 221, 228–229
Julius Caesar, 20, 134, 135
Jünger, Ernst, 112–113
justice, 99, 101, 106, 107, 137, 205
Justinian, Emperor, 21

Killeen, Colin, 182–183
kindness, 101, 205
Kohlberg, Lawrence, 131
Kurzweil, Ray, 162–163
Laches, 235
lameness, 127
lamp thief example, 172
language, 51
Late Roman Stoa, 6, 21
leadership, 101
letter of introduction example, 104
“Letter to Menoeceus” (Epicurus), 160
levels of influence over the world, 33
lexicographic preferences, 75–77, 204
liberals, political, 98, 103, 105
liberum mortis arbitrium (free choice of death), 40
lion and fox proverb, 190
listening, 225
Lives of the Eminent Philosophers (Diogenes Laertius), 17, 167
logic, 22, 24, 25, 177, 204, 233
Logos (rational principle of the cosmos), 6, 10, 84, 90, 102
logotherapy, 8–9, 21
loneliness, 182–185
causes of, 183–184
Epictetus’s advice about, 184–185
as opposed to being alone, 184
scientific perspective on, 182–183
Lopez, Greg, 140
Lou Gehrig’s disease, 164
love, 187–193
categories of, 191
distraught father example, 187–189
friendships and, 193

Greeks’ understanding of, 191
loyalty to sports team, 192–193
separating natural from good, 190–191
Lucian of Samosata, 202
Lucius Cornelius Sulla, 134
Lyceum, 235 fig. A.1, 236
Lycon, 65
Maasai (Kenya), 102
Malala Yousafzai, 96–97
Mandela, Nelson, 194
Man’s Search for Meaning (Frankl), 8–9
mantra, 175, 176, 211
Marcus Aurelius, emperor of Rome
adversity as training for life, 149
belief in gods, 87–88
fame of, 14, 21
meditation of, 102
misfortunes of, 42
personal reflections of, 63–64
Marcus Cato. See Cato the Younger
Marinoff, Lou, 181
meaning and purpose, inquiries into, 2
Medea, 110, 117–119
Medea (Euripides), 109–110
meditation, 3, 5, 63, 102
Meditations (Marcus Aurelius), 64, 87–88, 149
Meletus, 65
Memorabilia (Xenophon), 18
Mendel, Gregor, 50
Meno (Plato), 130
meta-ethical positions, 56–57
metaphysics, 5, 11, 19, 22, 79, 83, 89, 233
Middle Stoa, 20

Mill, John Stuart, 238
miracles, 85
Mithridates, King, 20
moderation, 205
Montaigne, Michel de, 21, 160
Montesquieu, 21
moral development, 130–131
moral virtue, 130
moralis (Latin translation of Greek for ethics), 22
morality
derivation of term, 22
developmental model, 130–131
post-conventional, 131
pre-conventional, 131
roots of, 56–57
stages of, 131
More, Thomas, 21
movie example, 211–212
Musil, Robert, 116
Musonius Rufus, 13, 14, 21, 69–70, 165, 168
National Security Agency, 66
natural selection, 49–50, 82
nature, following, 47–61
applying reason to social life, 48, 52, 204, 211
bathhouse example, 211
distinguishing man from wild beasts, 47, 54
distraught father example, 187–189
dog and leash example, 212–213
Epictetus’s explanation of, 54, 58–59
God/gods, 86
human nature, 48–54
is/ought gap, 55–56
movie example, 211–212

roots of morality, 56–57
Stoic approach to ethics, 58–61
nature and nurture, 36, 132
Nazi regime, 112, 116
negative thinking, dichotomy of control and, 149
negative visualization, 151–152
Nero, emperor of Rome, 13, 167–168
New Atheism, 4, 10, 88, 90
The New Yorker, on Eichmann trial, 112
Nicopolis, Greece, 14, 202
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 30
nihilism, 2
North Vietnam, 124
North Vietnamese, 126, 128–129
Octavian Augustus, emperor of Rome, 20
Odysseus, 86
oikeiôsis (appropriation of other people’s concerns, related to cosmopolitanism),
61, 101, 189
The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals (Pollan), 69
On Stupidity (Musil), 116
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 49
Oropus, Greece, 20
Overby, Andrew, 146–152
Paconius Agrippinus, 39
pain, 75, 129, 189, 214, 215, 227, 237
Pakistan, Right to Education Bill, 97
Paley, William, 80
panentheism, 84, 90
pantheism, 84, 90
Pappas, Nickolas, 140
parents, loss of, 209–210
passion, 117

pathological conditions, 181
patience, 214
Paul of Tarsus, 100
penis bone, 51
Pericles, 115
Peripatetics, 19, 20, 236, 238
perspective, 101
perseverance, 100
Peterson, Christopher, 100
Pharsalus, Greece, 135
philía (dispassionate love), 191, 196
Phillips, David, 169
philosophers, caricatures of, 171
philosophy
classical branches of, 233
Hellenistic schools of, 234–239, 235 fig. A.1
need for practice, 190
reasons for studying, 9–10, 111, 160, 234
styles of, 2
physics, 22, 24, 204
Piaget, Jean, 131
Pisonian conspiracy, 165, 168
Plato
Academy/Platonism, 234, 235 fig. A.1, 236
on amathia (lack of wisdom), 114–116
Republic, 236, 238
Symposium, 191
theory of Forms, 236, 238
Plato, Not Prozac! (Marinoff), 181
Platonic dialogues, 235
Platonism (the Academy), 234, 235 fig. A.1, 236
pleasure, 237
Plutarch, 135
polio, 140–141

political suicide, 169
politics, role of character in, 105
Pollan, Michael, 69
Polynices, 194
post-conventional morality, 131
Post-Polio Health International, 140
pre-conventional morality, 131
preferred indifferents, 10, 64, 74, 199, 204, 205
prejudice, 237
premeditatio malorum (foreseeing bad things), 151, 216
presidential candidates, character of, 104–105
Priscus, Helvidius, 95–96
prisoners, exploitation of, 128
problem-solving, 177
prokoptôn (practicioner of Stoic principles), 63
prosocial behaviors, 102
Protagoras, 235
Protestant theology, influence of Stoicism on, 21
proto-moral behaviors, 57
Providence, 84, 86–88, 110, 158, 166
prudence, 101
psychological vulnerability, 183
psychology, 22, 130, 131, 174, 181, 195
Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus example, 39–40
Pythagoreans, 102
Quayle, Daniel, 123
rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT), 8, 21
rationalism, 56–57
reason
age of reason, 58, 131, 190
amathia (lack of wisdom) and, 116–117
application to social living, 48, 52, 204

Aristotelian view of, 236
Platonic view of, 236
Socratic view of, 235–236
uniqueness to humans, 54, 84
recasting situations, 174–175
reflection on daily activities, 229–231
regret, 38, 210
reification, 114
relaxation techniques, 175–176
Republic (Plato), 236, 238
reserve clause
bathhouse example, 211
dog and leash example, 212
Epictetus’s counsel on, 211, 212
movie example, 211–212
tennis example, 213–214
resilience, 9, 184–185
rhetoric, 18, 22
Rhinelander, Philip, 125–126
Rhodes, 20
Right to Education Bill, Pakistan, 97
Roddenberry, Gene, 2
role models, 123–154
Andrew Overby, 146–152
autistic author, 152–153
Carl Sagan, 161
choosing, 132
coping skills, 153–154
Helvidius Priscus, 95–96
Herennius Senecio, 96
ideal Stoic role model, 133
James Stockdale, 123–129
Jesus, 133
lack of perfection in, 133

Lawrence Becker, 139–146
Malala Yousafzai, 96–97
Marcus Cato, 134–136
Paconius Agrippinus, 39
role of, 132
Socrates, 67
Roman emperors, persecution of Stoics by, 13–14
Roman generals, reminders of mortality for, 209
Roman Republic, 20, 134
Rome, interest in philosophy, 20
rudeness, 225
Russell, Bertrand, 4
Rutledge, Howie, 129
Sagan, Carl, 161
Sage, or wise person, as Stoic ideal, 133
salons, 221
sarcasm, 178
Sarpedon, 134
Schurz, Carl, 192–193
sciphi (science and philosophy for a better life), 4
seafaring metaphor, 106
secular humanism, 2, 5, 10
self-awareness, 148
self-control, 101, 205, 214, 215, 227, 237
self-deprecation, 223
self-improvement, 150, 214, 226
self-knowledge, 144, 147, 148–149, 153
self-respect, 126, 127
Seligman, Martin, 100
Seneca
Cato as role model, 136
on death, 7, 160
exercise, 176

during late Roman Stoa, 21
nature of wise person, 133
as Nero’s advisor, 167–168
preferred and dispreferred experiences, 75
reflecting on one’s day, 229–231
self-improvement, 152–153
social dimension of human existence, 153
suicide, 14, 168
truth, 12, 87, 196
vegetarianism, 69
Senecio, Herennius, 96
Serenity Prayer, versions of, 30–31
shame, 129
Shantideva, 30
Shermer, Michael, 120
singing performance example, 180
Singularity, 162
skepticism, 56
Skeptics, 12, 19
Slaughterhouse Five (Vonnegut), 29–30
Snowden, Edward, 66–67
Socrates
examination of one’s life, 10
gods, 86
Hellenic schools of philosophy, 234, 235 fig. A.1
ignorance, 113–115
influence on Stoics, 19
moral duty, 65–66
oikeiôsis (appropriation of other people’s
cosmopolitanism), 61
practicality of philosophy, 22
students of, 73
virtue, 98–99, 130, 204
Socraticism, 235–236

concerns,

related

to

solitary confinement, 129
solitude, 183, 184
sophia (wisdom, broadly construed), 115
Sophie’s World (Gaarder), 152
sophist, 171
The Sorrows of Young Werther (Goethe), 169
Spartacus, 134
Spinoza, Baruch, 21, 84
spiritual exercises, 203, 205–231
explanation of, 203
Choose your company well, 222–223
Don’t speak too much about yourself, 226–228
Examine your impressions, 205–207
How can I use virtue here and now?, 214–216
Other-ize, 217–219
Pause and take a deep breath, 216–217
Reflect on your day, 229–231
Remind yourself of the impermanence of things, 207–210
The reserve clause, 211–214
Respond to insults with humor, 225–226
Speak little and well, 219–222
Speak without judging, 228–229
spirituality, 101
Stanford University, 125, 126
stardust, humans as, 161
Stoa Poikile (painted porch), 18
Stockdale, James, 9, 123–129, 169
Stockdale Paradox, 125
Stoic Week, 7–8
Stoicism
ancient study of, 22–23
anger management, 172–179
aphorisms, 63–64
application to ordinary life, 136–137

assent, 23–26, 24 fig. 2.1, 43, 45, 111, 173, 177
attachment to things and people, 40–42, 208
ball-playing analogy, 64–65
character, 10, 103–107, 182
Christianity and (See Stoicism and Christianity)
compassion, 117–118, 120–121
cosmopolitanism, 60–61, 60 fig. 4.1
Cynicism and, 19, 235 fig. A.1
death, 157–161, 219
defined, 2–3, 10
depression, 146–152
destiny, 158
developmental model of morality, 130–131
disciplines, 23–25, 24 fig. 2.1, 203–204
as ecumenical philosophy, 10–11
ethics and, 58–61, 72–73
evolution of, 11–12
external goods, 238
facing reality, 42
friendship, 193–196, 198–199
garden metaphor, 23
God/gods, 22, 84, 86–88, 90–91
history of, 17–21
ignorance as basis for evil, 113–121
influence of, 8–9, 21, 31
influences on, 19, 235 fig. A.1
internalizing goals, 213
Logos (rational principle of the cosmos), 84, 90, 102
love, 13, 189–190, 192–193
misinterpretation of, 38–39
oikeiôsis (appropriation of other people’s concerns,
cosmopolitanism), 61, 101, 189
openness to revision, 12
original, 11

related

to

persecution of Stoics by Roman emperors, 13–14
as philosophy of love, 208
practicality of, 6, 77, 79, 132, 133, 147, 172
practice, emphasis on, 63, 190–191
principles of, 3, 5–7, 22–26, 204–205
reason applied to social living, 48, 52, 204
relationships among Stoic disciplines, areas of inquiry, and cardinal virtues, 24
fig. 2.1
rephrasings, 174–175
social dimension of human existence, 153
study, areas of, 23, 204
suicide, 164–170
theoretical framework of, 21
transcendence, 101, 102
virtue, 24 fig. 2.1, 25, 74–77, 98–99, 130–131, 204, 205, 214–216
wise person as Stoic ideal, 133
See also dichotomy of control; disability; indifferents; integrity; nature,
following; spiritual exercises
Stoicism and Christianity
argument for design, 80
character and virtue, 98–100
compassion, 117–118
key concepts, 31
Logos/God, 80
Protestant theology, influence of Stoicism on, 21
rephrasings, 174
stolen wallet example, 173–174
storgē (love that is inherently felt, not mediated by reason), 191
study, areas of, 23, 204
suffering, 83
suicide, 164–170
assisted, 164, 168
Betsy Davis’s experience, 164
Cato the Younger’s experience, 135–136, 168

James Stockdale’s experience, 168, 169
open door, 164–170
personal judgment and, 167–168
political, 169
proscribed cases, 169–170
Publius Clodius Thrasea Paetus’s experience, 39–40
Seneca’s experience, 168
Werther effect, 169
Zeno’s experience, 18–19, 167, 168
suicide bombers, 169
Summa Theologiae (Thomas Aquinas), 100
Swat Valley, Pakistan, 97
sympathy, 206
Symposium (Plato), 191
Taliban, 97
Tanner, Nels, 128
Taoism, 2, 10, 31, 100
teenage daughter example, 38
temperance, 24, 99, 101, 106, 107, 137, 205
temptation, 215
tennis match example, 213–214
Thapsis, Greece, 135
theists, 90
theology, 22
therapy, psychological, 9, 181, 201
thievery, 194
thievery examples, 174
Thomas Aquinas, 21, 80, 100
Tonkin Gulf incident, 124
tranquillity, 10, 129, 148, 215
transcendence, 101, 102
transcendental virtues, 100
Transhumanists, 162–163

truth, 12, 14, 87, 111, 190, 196
Turkish coup example, 42–45
Ulam, Stanisław, 162
universal causality, 5, 85
University of Exeter, England, 7
vegetarianism, 68–69
vengeance, 117
Vespasian, emperor of Rome, 14, 95–96
vice-presidential debate, 1992, 123
Vietnam War, 124, 126
violence, 194
Virgil, 13
virtue ethics, 4, 73
virtue(s)
acquisition of, 130–131
Aristotelian, 130, 236
as aspects of wisdom, 98–99
cardinal, 24 fig. 2.1, 25, 100, 205
Christian concept of, 99–100
Cynics’ view of, 19, 73–74, 77, 237
”heavenly,” 100
as highest good, 204
importance, 98, 121
intellectual, 130
moral, 130
sources of, 130
Stoic classification of, 99
transcendental, 100
using in daily life, 214–216
in various religious-philosophical traditions, 100–103
Vonnegut, Kurt, 29
voyage analogy, 33

Wallace, Alfred Russel, 49
Warburton, Nigel, 136
wealth, 10, 204
Werther effect, 169
Why I Am Not a Christian (Russell), 4
wisdom, practical
as cardinal virtue, 24, 98–101, 205, 226
as Chief Good, 114, 235
importance of, 106, 107, 121, 137
wise person as ideal role model, 133
women, education of, 70
women in Roman Republic, 134
workout analogy, 227
wounded leg example, 83, 85
Yousafzai, Malala, 96–97
Yousafzai, Ziauddin, 97
Zeno of Citium (or Cyprus), 17–19, 47, 167, 168, 235 fig. A.1, 238
Zenonians, 18

